CHAPTER 1

Clef

"I could give you some sleepfog," the lady robot said.
"You stayed awake all night researching, and the Game is
this afternoon. You have to rest."

"No dmgsl" Stile snapped. "Better to be keyed up than
fogged out."

"Better yet to be rational," she said.

He shook his head, looking at her. She was so exactly
like a woman that most people never realized the truth.
Not only could she function in all the ways of a living
human female, she was extremely well formed. Her hair
was a sun-bleached brown, shoulder length; her lips were
full and slightly tinted, kissable; her eyes were green be-
hind long lashes. She was the sort of creature rich, lonely
men obtained to gratify their private passions more per-
fectly than any real woman would. But Stile knew her for
what she was, and had no passion for her. "This is one
time I wish I could just dick off the way you can."

"I wish I were flesh," she said wistfully. She was pro-
grammed to love him and protect him and she was abso-
lutely true to her program, as a machine had to be. "Come
on—I'll put you to sleep." She took Stile's head in her lap
and stroked his hair and hummed a lullaby.

Oddly enough, it worked. Her body was warm and soft,
her touch gentle, and he had complete faith in her motive.
Stile was dose to few people and he tended to feel easier
around machines. His tensions slipped away and his con-
sciousness followed.

He found himself dreaming of the time several days
before, when he had passed the Platinum Flute on to the
musician Clef and guided the man across the curtain. In
this dream he followed Clef's consciousness, not his own.
1

2                       juxtaposition

Somehow this did not seem strange. Stile had felt an instant
and deep camaraderie with the man when they played
music together. Stile himself was highly skilled with a
number of instruments, but Clefs musical ability amounted
to genius. It had been impossible to remain aloof from a
person who played that welL

Clef had never been to the frame of Phaze. He stared at
the lush tufts of grass, the tremendous oaks and pines, and
the unicorn awaiting them, as if he were seeing something
strange.

"This is Neysa," Stile informed him, perceived in the
dream as a different person. The unicorn was black, with
white socks on the rear feet, and was as small for her
species as Stile was for his. Clef towered over them both,
and felt awkward. "She wfll carry thee to the Platinum
Demesnes."

What affectation was this? Stile had spoken normally
until this moment. "I don't even know how to ridel" Clef
protested. "And that's a mythical creaturel" He eyed the
long spiraled hom, wishing he could touch it to verify that
it was only tacked on to the horse. He had been told that
this was a land of magic, but he found that hard to credit.

"Well, I could conjure thee there, but—"

"Absolutely noti Magic is—incredible. Wherever I have
to go. Ill walk."

Stile shrugged. "That is thy business. But I must insist
that Neysa accompany thee. Until thou dost reach the
protection of the Little Folk, this region is not safe foi
thee."

"Why are you suddenly talking archaically?" Clef de-
manded.

"This is the tongue of this frame," Stile explained.
"Now must I conjure clothing for thee."

"Clothingi" Clef exclaimed, daunted. "I am a serf, like
you, forbidden to—I can not—"

Stile had recovered a package of clothing from a hiding
place and was putting it on. "Here in Phaze, thou art a
man. Trust me; clothe thyself." He paused, then said in a
singsong voice: "An ye can, clothe this man."

Suddenly Clef was clothed like a Citizen of Proton, with

juxtaposition                       3

silken trousers, shirt, jacket of light leather, and even
shoes. He felt ludicrous and illicit. "If anyone sees me in
this outrageous costume—" He squinted at Stile. "You
were serious about magici You conjured this!"

"Aye. Now must I conjure myself to the Blue Demesnes,
to report to the Lady Blue. Neysa and the Flute will keep
thee safe, methinks. Farewell, friend."

"Farewell," Clef responded weakly.

Stile sang another spell and vanished. Clef contemplated
the vacated spot for a while, absorbing this new evidence
of enchantment, then felt his own clothing. Blue trousers,
golden shirt—what next? "And I'm supposed to travel with
you," he said to the little unicorn. "With thee, I should
perhaps say. Well, he did warn me there would be tribula-
tions. I don't suppose you know the direction?"

Neysa blew a note through her hom that sounded like
an affirmation rendered in harmonica music. Clef had not
realized that the animal's hom was hollow, or that she
would really comprehend his words. He followed her lead.

The scenery was lovely. To the near south was a range
of purple-hued mountains, visible through gaps in the for-
est cover. The immediate land was hilly, covered with rich
green turf. Exotic birds fluttered in the branches of the
trees. No path was visible, but the unicorn picked out an
easy passage unerringly.

"Are you—art thou able to play music on that hom?"
Clef inquired facetiously, feeling a need to assert himself
verbally if not physically.

For answer, Neysa played a merry little tune, as if on a
well-handled harmonica. Clef, amazed, fell silent. He
would have to watch what he said in this fantastic frame;

more things were literal than he was inclined to believe.

The pace became swift, as Neysa moved up to her limit.
Clef had always liked to walk, so was in no discomfort,
but wondered just how far they were going. In Proton,
with the limitation of the domes, it was never necessary to
walk far before encountering mass transportation. Obvi-
ously there was no such limit here.

The animal perked up her small ears, listening for some-
thing. Clef knew that horses had good hearing, and pre-
sumed unicorns were the same. It occurred to him that a




4                       juxtaposition

world of magic could have magical dangers and he had no
notion how to cope with that sort of thing. Presumably
this equine would protect him in much the way Stile's
distaff robot protected him in Proton; stiU, Clef felt ner-
vous.

Then, abruptly, the unicorn became a petite young
woman, wearing a simple black dress and white slippers.
She was small, even smaller than Stile, with lustrous black
hair that reminded him of the mane or tail of—

Of course! This was, after all, the same creature, in a
different shape. She even had a snub-hom in her forehead,
and her shoes somehow resembled hooves, for their slipper
tops tied into thick, sturdy soles.

"Stile is getting married," Neysa said. There was the
suggestion of harmonica music in her voice. "I must go
there. I will summon a werewolf to guide thee."

"A werewolf 1" Clef exclaimed, horrified.

But the girl was a unicorn again. She blew a loud blast
on her horn.

Faintly, there was an answering baying. Now Neysa
played a brief harmonica tune. There was a responding
yip, much closer. She changed back into the girl. Clef tried
to ascertain how she did that, but it was too quick; she
seemed simply to phase from one form to the other with
no intermediate steps. Perhaps that was why this frame
was called Phaze—people phased from one form to an-
other, or from nudity to attire, or from place to place.

"A bitch is coming," Neysa said, startling Clef again; he
had not expected such a term from so pert a miss. "Fare-
well." She changed into a firefly, flashed once, and zoomed
away to the north. There seemed to be no conservation of
mass here.

A dark shape charged toward him, low and furry,
gleaming-eyed and toothed. Clef clutched the Platinum
Flute—and suddenly it was a fine rapier. "Will wonders
never ceasel" he exclaimed. This was a weapon with which
he was proficient. He stood awaiting the onslaught of the
wolf with enhanced confidence, though he was by no
means comfortable. He did not relish the idea of blood-
shed, even in self-defense.

But the creature drew up short and metamorphosed into

Juxtaposition                       5

a woman. This one was older; in fact, she looked grand-
motherly.

Clef was catching on to the system. "You—thou art the
werewolf the unicorn summoned?"

"Aye. I am the werebitch available, man-creature. I
have seen weddings enow; since my old wolf died I care
not overmuch to see more. I will guide and guard thee to
the Elven Demesnes. Put thou that blade away."

"It is not a blade; it is a rapier," Clef said somewhat
primly. But now it was neither; it was the Flute again.
"Neysa told you all that in one brief melody?"

"Aye. She was ever economical of speech. What is thy
name, man?" the bitch inquired as she walked east.

"Clef, from the frame of Proton. And thine?"

"Serrilryan, of Kurrelgyre's Pack. We range mostly
southeast of the Blue Demesnes, up to the Puiple Moun-
tains. Good hunting here."

"No doubt," Clef agreed dryly.

"If thou art walking all the way to the Platinum
Demesnes, thou wilt have to step faster. Clef-man. We
have forty miles to go."

"My legs are already tiring, Serrilryan."

"We can help that. Take thou a sniff of this." She held
out a little bag of something.

Clef sniffed. The bag emitted a pungent aroma. "What is
this?"

"Wolfsbane. For strength."

"Superstition," he muttered.

"Have ye noted how fast thy walk is now?"

Clef noticed, with surprise. "I'm almost running, but I
don't feel winded at alii"

"Superstition," she said complacently.

Whatever it was, it enabled him to cover distance with
wolflike endurance. Serrilryan shifted back to canine form
to pace him.

Still, they were only partway there as night came on.
The bitch became the woman again. "Do thou make a fire,
Clef-man. I will hunt supper."

"But—" But she was already back to bitch-form and
gone.

Clef gathered what dry wood he could find, along with




6                       juxtaposition

bits of old moss and straw. He formed a neat tepee, but
had no idea how to ignite it. Presumably the denizens of
this frame could make fire with simple spells, or perhaps
they borrowed fire-breathing dragons. Such resources were
not available to him.

Then he had a notion. The Platinum Flute had become
a rapier when he wanted a weapon; could it also become a.

fire maker?

He held it near the tepee. It had formed into a dublike
rod. From the tip a fat spark jumped, igniting the mass. He
had discovered how to use this thingi He was almost get-
ting to like magic.

When the bitch returned with a freshly slain rabbit, the
fire was ready. "Good enough," she said gruffly. She

roasted the rabbit on a spit.

This type of meal was foreign to Clef, but he managed
to get through it. Stile had warned him there would be
privations. But he was ready to suffer anything to obtain
legitimate possession of the Platinum Flute, the most re-
markable instrument he could imagine. Only the Little
Folk could grant that; it was their Flute.

Serrilryan showed him where there was a streamlet of
fresh water, so that he could drink and wash. Out of
deference to his human sensitivity, she refrained from lap-
ping her own drink until he was sated.

Now all he had to worry about was the night. He really
wasn't equipped to sleep in the wilderness. "Serrilryan, I
realize that for your kind this is no problem, but I am not
accustomed to sleeping outside. I am concerned about
bugs and things." Though in fact no bugs had bothered
him here; perhaps the reek of the wolfsbane kept them
away. "Is there any domicile available?"

"Aye," she said. She brought out a small object. Ap-
parently she could carry clothing and objects on her per-
son even in wolf form, though none of it showed then.

Clef looked at the thing. It appeared to be a tiny doll's
house. "I'm afraid I don't quite follow."

"It is an amulet," she explained. "Invoke it."

"Invoke it?" he asked blankly.

She nodded. "Set it down first, man."

He set it on the ground. "Uh, I invoke thee."

Juxtaposition                       7

The amulet expanded. Clef stepped back, alarmed. The
thing continued to grow. Soon it was the size of a dog-
house, then a playhouse. Finally it stood complete: a small,
neat, thatch-roofed log cabin.

"Well, I neveri" Clef exclaimed. "A magic house!"

Serrilryan opened the door and entered. Clef followed,
bemused. Inside was a wooden table with two chairs and a
bed with a down quilt. Clef contemplated this with a cer-
tain misgiving, realizing that there were two of them and
only one sleeping place. "Um—"

She phased back to canine form and curled herself up
comfortably on the floor at the foot of the bed. That
solved the problem. She needed no human props and
would be there if anything sought to intrude during the
night. Clef was getting to appreciate werewolves.

He accepted the bed gratefully, stripped away his un-
gainly clothing, lay down, and was soon asleep.

Stile's consciousness relumed as Clefs faded. Sheen was
still stroking his hair, as tireless as a machine. "I never
realized he would have so much trouble," Stile murmured.
He told her of his dream. "I'm used to Phaze now, but it
was quite an adjustment at first. I forgot all about Clef,
and I shouldn't have."

"Go back to sleep," she told him.

"That amulet—that would have been fashioned by the
Red Adept. She's gone now, because of me. I really should
see about finding a new Adept to make amulets; they are
too useful to be allowed to disappear."

"I'm sure you will," Sheen said soothingly.

"Phaze needs amulets."

She picked up his head and hugged it against her
bosom, smotheringly. "Stile, if you don't go to sleep volun-
tarily—"

He laughed. "You're a bitch."

"A female werewolf," she agreed. "We do take good
care of wayward men."

They did indeed. Stile drifted back to his dream.

Next morning Serrilryan brought some excellent fruit
she had foraged. They ate and prepared to resume the




8                       Juxtaposition

inarch. "This cabin—can it be compressed back into its
token?" Clef asked.

"Nay. A spell functions but once," she said. "Leave it;

others may use it after us, or the Blue Adept may disman-
tle it with a spell. Most likely the Little Folk will carry it
to their mountain demesnes."

'Tes, of course it shouldn't be wasted," Clef agreed.

They walked. His legs were stiff from the prior day's
swift walk. The wolfsbane had worn off, and Serrilryan
did not offer more. It was dangerous to overuse such
magic, she said. So they progressed slowly east, through
forest and field, over hills and through deep gullies, around
boulders and huge dense bushes. The rugged beauty of the
natural landscape was such that it distracted him from his
discomfort. What a special land this wasi

In the course of the day he heard something to the east.
Serrilryan's wolf ears perked. Then he observed a column
of thick, colored smoke rising from the sky. There had
been a bad explosion and foe somewhere.

'That is Blue fighting Red," the bitch said knowingly.
"She killed him; now he is killing her."

"I realize this is a frame of magic," Clef said. "Even so,
that does not seem to make an extraordinary amount of
sense."

"Adept fighting Adept is bad business," she agreed.

"How could they take turns killing each other?"

"There are two selves of many people, one in each
frame," she explained. "One self cannot meet the other.
But when one dies, there is a vacuum and the other can
cross the curtain. Blue now avenges the murder of his
other self."

"Oh, I see," Clef said uncertainly. "And must I avenge
the murderer of mine other self?"

"Mayhap. Where wast thou whelped?"

"On another planet," Clef said, surprised. "I signed for
Proton serf tenure as a young man—"

"Then thy roots are not here. Thou hast no other self
here, so art not barred from crossing."

"Oh. Fortunate for me, I suppose. Dost thou also have
another self in Proton?"

juxtaposition                       9

"Nay. But if I crossed, I would be but a cur, unable to
were-change. And the hunting is not good there."

Clef had to laugh agreement. "All too truel Proton,
beyond the force-field domes, is a desert. Nothing but
pollution."

"Aye," she agreed, wrinkling her nose. "When men
overrun a planet, they destroy it."

"Yet Stile—the Blue Adept—he is also a serf in Proton,
like me."

"He was whelped on Proton. His root is here."

Clef watched the dissipating grotesqueries of the cloud
of smoke. "I'm glad I'm not his enemy!" He resumed
slogging forward. At this rate he would be lucky to travel
ten miles by dusk.

Actually, he realized, it might be just as well to take
several days before reaching the Little Folk. There was a
tremendous amount to learn about Phaze, and this slow
trek was an excellent introduction. When he finally did
arrive, he would have a much better comprehension of the
frame, and know how to deport himself. With all the
pitfalls of magic, he needed that experience.

The werebitch paced him uncomplainingly. She shifted
from form to form at need, conversing when he wished,
scouting when there was anything suspicious in the vicin-
ity. Finally he asked her: "Is this not an imposition, Ser-
rilryan, for thee, shepherding a novice while thy Pack is
active elsewhere?"

"I am oath-friend to Neysa the unicorn," she replied.
"For her would I shepherd a snow-demon halfway to
Hell."

"Halfway?"

"At that point, the demon would melt." She smiled tol-
erantly. "Besides which, this is easy duty for an old bitch.
I am sure the Blue Adept has excellent reasons to convey
thee to the Mound Demesnes." She considered. "If I may
inquire—7"

"I am to play the Platinum Flute for the Mound Folk,
to enable them to ascertain whether I am the one they call
the Foreordained. That is all I know—except that my life
will have little purpose if I can not keep this ultimate
instrument."




10

Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

11

"The Foreordainedl" she exclaimed. "Then is the end of
Phaze nearl"

"Why? I consider it to be a pretentious, perhaps non-
sensical title, to say the least, and of course there is no
certainty that I am the one they seek. I am merely a £ne
musician and a rather good fencer. What have I to do with
the fate of a land of magic?"

"That is all I know," she admitted. "Be not affronted,
Clef-man, if I hope thou art not he."

"I take no affront from thee, bitch." He had long since
realized that the term he had considered to be uncompli-
mentary was the opposite here.

"Thou dost play the flute well?"

"Very well."

"Better than Blue?"

"Aye. But I decline to play this particular instrument in
the frame of Phaze until I meet the Mound Folk. It is said
the mountain may tremble if—"

"Aye, wait," she agreed. "No fool's errand, this."

"Dost thou like music, Serrilryan?"

"Some. Baying, belike, at full moon."

"Baying is not my specialty. I could whistle, though."

"That is music?" she asked, amused.

"It can be, properly executed. There are many types of
whistles. Hand-whistling can resemble a woodwind."

"Aye, with magic."

"No magic, bitch. Like this." He nibbed his hands to-
gether, convoluted his long fingers into the appropriate
configuration, and blew. A fine, dear pipe note emerged.
He adjusted his fingers as if tuning the instrument and
blew again, making a different pitch. Then he essayed a
minor melody.

The sound was beautiful. Clef had not exaggerated
when he claimed to play well; he was probably the finest
and most versatile musician on the planet. His crude hands
produced prettier music than that of most other people
using fine instruments.

Serrilryan listened, entranced, phasing back and forth
between her forms to appreciate it in each. "That is not
magic?" she asked dubiously when he paused.

"I know no magic. This is straight physical dexterity."

"Never have I heard the likel" she exclaimed. "The Blue
Adept played the Flute at the Unolympics, and methought
that was the most perfect melody ever made. Now I think
thou mightest eclipse it, as thou sayest. Canst thou do real
whistling too?"

Clef smiled at her naivete. He pursed his lips and whis-
tled a few bars of classical music eloquently. She was
delighted.

So they continued, and in the evening he serenaded her
with a whistle concert. Squirrels and sparrows appeared in
nearby trees, listening raptfy. Clef had discovered how to
relate to the wild creatures of this lovely wilderness world.

This night the werebitch had located a serviceable cave
to sleep in. They piled straw and fem for a bed, and she
curled up by the entrance. It was a good night. He was
getting to like Fhaze.

Stile woke again. "Time to go for the Game," he mum-
bled.

"Not yet. Sleep," Sheen said. She was a machine, inde-
fatigable; she could sit up and hold him indefinitely and
was ready to do so. She was his best and perhaps his only
personal friend in this frame. She had saved his life on
several occasions. He trusted her. He slept.

The third day Clef found his muscles acclimatizing, and
he traveled better. But the world of Phaze seemed restless.
There was the sound of horse or unicorn hooves pounding
to the east, and a lone wolf passed nearby. "What's going
on?"

"The Red Adept has sprung a trap on the Blue Adept,"
Serrilryan said, having somehow picked up this news from
the pattern of baying and the musical notes of the distant
unicorns. "He is badly injured but can not cross the cur-
tain for magic healing, for that a basilisk has hold of him.
It is very bad." Indeed, she was worried and, when she
returned to bitch-form, her hackles were ruffled. Clef, too,
was concerned; he had known Stile only a few hours be-
fore their parting, but liked him well and wished him well.
There seemed to be nothing he could do, however.




12 Juxtaposition

But later the situation eased. "They have saved him,"
Serrilryan reported. "He is weak, but survives."

Clef's own tension abated. "I am exceedingly glad to
hear that. He lent me the Platinum Flute, and for this
marvelous instrument I would lay down my life. It was the
sight of it that brought me here, though I am wary of the
office it portends."

"Aye."

In the afternoon they heard a sudden clamor. Some-
thing was fluttering, squawking, and screeching. The
sounds were hideous, in sharp contrast to the pleasure of
the terrain.

Serrilryan's canine lip curled. Quickly she shifted to
human form. "Beast birdsl Needs must we hide."

But it was not to be. The creatures had winded them,
and the pursuit was on. "Let not their filthy daws touch
thee," the werebitch warned. "The scratches will fester
into gangrene." She changed back to canine form and
stood guarding him, teeth bared.

The horde burst upon them. They seemed to be large
birds—but their faces were those of ferocious women.
Clef's platinum rapier was in his hand, but he hesitated to
use it against these part-human creatures. Harpies—that
was what they were.

They gave him little opportunity to consider. Three of
them flew at his head, discolored talons extended. "Kill!
Kill!" they screamed. The smell was appalling.

Serrilryan leaped, her teeth catching the grimy under-
belly of one bird. Greasy feathers fell out as the creature
emitted a shriek of amazing ugliness. Immediately the
other two pounced on the wolf, and two more swooped
down from above.

Clef's misgivings were abruptly submerged by the need
to act. There seemed to be no chance to reason or warn;

he simply had to fight.

Clef was aware that the werewolf had taken his remark
about his skill at fencing to be vanity, for he was hardly
the warrior type. However, he had spoken the truth. The
rapier danced before him. In seven seconds he skewerd
four harpies, while Serrilryan dropped the fifth, dead.

The remaining beast birds now developed some crude

Juxtaposition                      13

caution. They flapped and bustled, screeching epithets, but
did not charge again. Their eyes were on the gleaming
platinum weapon; they had suddenly learned respect.

Clef took a step toward them, and the foul creatures
scattered, hurling back one-syllable words fully as filthy as
their feathers. This threat had been abated.

"Thou art quite a hand with that instrument," Serrilryan
remarked appreciatively. "Never saw I a sword stab so
swiftly."

"I never used a rapier in anger before," Clef said, feel-
ing weak and revolted now that the brief action was over.
"But those horrible creatures—"

"Thou didst withhold thy strike until they clustered on
ine."

"Well, I couldn't let them—those claws—"

"Aye," she said, and went canine again.

But there was something wrong. She had tried to con-
ceal it, but his reaction to this combat had made him more
perceptive to physical condition. "Wait—thou hast been
scratchedl" Clef said. "Thy shoulder's bleeding!"

"Wounds are nothing to wolves," she said, phasing
back. But it showed on her dame-form too, the blood
now staining her shawl. "How much less, a mere scratch."

"But thou didst say—"

"Doubtless I exaggerated. Bleeding cleans it." She
changed back again and ran ahead, terminating the di-
alogue.

Clef realized that she did not want sympathy for her
injury, at least not from the likes of him. Probably it was
unwolflike to acknowledge discomfort. Yet she had
warned him about the poisonous nature of harpy scratches.
He hoped nothing evil came of this.

That night they camped in a tree. Clef was now more
accustomed to roughing it, and this was a hugely spread-
ing yellow birch whose central nexus was almost like a
house. Serrilryan curled up in bitch-form, and he curled
up beside her, satisfied with the body warmth she radiated.
The papery bark of the tree was slightly soft. and he was
able to form a pillow of his bent arm. Yes, he was coming
to like this life.

"This frame is just a little like Heaven," he remarked as

14 Juxtaposition

sleep drew nigh. "My frame of Proton is more like Hell,
outside the domes, where nothing grows."

"Mayhap it is Proton-frame I am destined for," she said,
shifting just far enough to dame-form to speak, not bother-
ing to uncurl.

"Proton? Dost thou plan to cross the curtain, despite
thy loss of magic there?"

She growl-chuckled ruefully. "Figuratively, man-person.
When I dTe, it will be the real Hell I will see."

"Hell? Thee? Surely thou wilt go to Heaven!" Clef did
not believe in either region, but neither did he believe in
magic.

"Surely would I wish to go to Heaven! There, belike, the
Glory Hounds run free. But that is not the destiny of the
likes of me. Many evils have I seen since I was a pup." She
shifted back to canine and slept.

Clef thought about that, disturbed. He did not believe
this was an immediate issue, but feared that she did. He
was bothered by her growing morbidity and her low esti-
mate of self-worth. She might have seen evil, but that did
not make her evil herself; sometimes evil was impossible to
escape. It had been that way with the harpies. Yet what
could he do to ease her depression?

Troubled, he slept.

"Strange dream," Stile said. "Every time he sleeps, I
wake. But I'm dreaming in minutes what he experienced in
days."

"How much farther does he have to go?" Sheen asked.

"He should reach the Elven Demesnes in two more
days."

"Then you sleep two more times. I want to learn how
this ends." Her Engers stroked his eyes closed.

Serrilryan's wound was not healing. It was red and
swollen, the blood refusing to coagulate properly. She
limped now, when she thought he wasn't looking, and her
pace was slower. She was suffering—and he couldn't
comment for fear of embarrassing her.

The terrain became more hilly. Huge trees grew out of
the slopes, some of their roots exposed by erosion. But the

juxtaposition                      15

eager grass was covering every available patch of ground,
and the turf was thick and spongy. Clef was soon breath-
less, ascending the steep, short slopes, drawing himself up
by handholds on trees and branches and tangles of roots.
Serrilryan followed, her familiarity with this region making
up for her weakness, shirting back and forth between
forms to take advantage of the best properties of each.

Something tugged at his hair. It was not the wind. Clef
paused, fearing he had snagged it in a low branch—but
there was no branch. He put his hand up, but there was
nothing. Yet the tugging continued, and now there were
little touches on his skin.

"Something's herel" he exclaimed, alarmed.

The bitch sniffed the air and cocked her ears. She
phased into woman-form. "Whistle," she said.

Perplexed, he whistled. Oddly, the touchings abated. He
whistled louder and with more intricacy, a medley of clas-
sical themes. He enhanced it with trills and double notes,
warming to it, serenading the landscape.

Slowly, shapes appeared. They were little people, perch-
ing on branches and on the slope and even floating in ail.
All were listening raptiy.

"Aye, the sidhe," Serrilryan said, pronouncing it shee.
"The Faerie Folk. They cause no harm, just idle mischief."

Discovered, the sidhe moved into a dance, whirling in
air. Their little lasses were, in the archaic measurement of
this frame, about four feet tall, the lads not much larger.
They moved prettily and smiled often—happy folk.

But when Clef stopped whistling, they faded out of sight
again. "The sidhe associate not overmuch with other folk,
but they do like music," the werebitch said. "I am destined
to see them three times before I die."

"How many times hast thou seen them so far?"

'This is the third time."

"Then I should not have whistled them into sightl"

She made a gesture of unconcern. "I am old; my pace is
slowing. My teeth are no longer sharp. The Pack wfll not
let me live much longer anyway. Glad am I to have seen
the lovely Faerie Folk once more."

"But this is barbaric! The other wolves have no right—"

"Question not the way of the Pack. I have killed others




16 juxtaposition

in my day; always I knew my turn would come. Perhaps it
would have come ere now, had I not been fated to guide
thee. I am content. Clef-man."

Clef shook his head, not commenting further. Obviously
there was violence along with the beauty and literal magic
of this frame.

They marched on. Later another phenomenon occurred
—a kind of sweeping of an unbreeze through the forest,
dissipation of nonexistent clouds in the sky, and revivifica-
tion of things that had not been dead. A hidden tension
had been released, an obligation expiated. "What is it?"
Clef asked.

"The lifting of a geis," Serrilryan said.

"I don't think I understand."

"The abatement of an oath. It hung over the forest; now
it is done."

"What oath is this?"

"The Blue Adept swore vengeance against the Red
Adept."

"Um, yes. But I thought he was getting married. He is
also moving through the Proton Tourney. Isn't this an
awful lot of activity for such an occasion?"

"There is no comprehending the ways of Adepts."

That seemed to be the case. The Blue Adept evidently
had a lot more power, and was involved in more great
events, than Clef had realized. It was mildly odd that so
small a man had so large an impact on this frame.

By nightfall they reached the marker for the Platinum
Demesnes, indicated by a sign saying FT 78.

"The path within is treacherous," the werebitch said.
"Morning is better for it."

*Tes, certainly." Clef wasn't sure, now that he was this
close, that he really wanted to reach these mysterious
elves. If he were not the Foreordained, they would take
the Flute from him, for it belonged to them.

Serrilryan knew of an existing shelter nearby, and they
spent the night there. "I want thee to know," he told her,
"how I appreciate the trouble thou hast taken on my be-
half. This all may come to naught, yet it has been worth-
while for me."

"I thank thee, man," she said. "It has been nice talking

juxtaposition                     17

with thee and hearing thy music. Few among the Pack
have time or courtesy for the old."

She did not look well at all. It was evident that pain was
preventing her from relaxing. Clef whistled, filling the air
with melody, and after a time the werewolf fell into a
troubled slumber. Then Clef himself relaxed.

"I didn't know there were harpies in that vicinity," Stile
said, waking. "I should have given him better protection.
Though the way he used that rapier—" He shrugged and
returned to sleep himself, secure in the robot's embrace.

In the morning Clef woke before the werebitch. She was
breathing in pants and whining slightly in her sleep. The
bad shoulder bulged with swelling, and the fur was falling
out. This was obviously a severe infection. A good antibi-
otic could abate it—but this was Phaze, the frame of
magic, where antibiotics were not available and perhaps
would not work anyway.

Magic was what was needed—but he could not perform
it. Unless the Flute—but no, he had resolved to play it
only for the Mound Folk, because of the potential signifi-
cance of the rendition. Still, maybe its magic could help.
He laid the instrument against her body, as close to the
wound as he could.

Her whining stopped; she was drawing comfort from
the propinquity of this powerful talisman. Still, she was
shivering, though the morning was warm. He had nothing
with which to cover her.

Clef began to whistle again; it was all he could do. This
time he selected a merry folk-song melody. He whistled it
well; the joyous notes rippled through the forest, abolish-
ing sadness. The bitch's shivering eased, and she slept
peacefully at last.

For an hour he whistled. At last she turned and woke.
She made a growl of displeasure at the lateness of the
hour, but Clef wasn't fooled. She had needed that extra
rest.

Breakfast was no problem. Squirrels and birds had
dropped nuts and berries as offerings of appreciation, and
these were excellent. This was a world that liked music.




18                      juxtaposition

Clef, in return, was becoming quite fond of this world. Yet    t
it had its dark side, as Serrilryan's ailment showed.

They mounted the steep trail leading to the Mound
Demesnes. Clef was now better able to manage than the
werewolf. He wished he could help her, but all he could do
was slow his pace to make it easier for her, leaving her
pride intact.

Deep in the mountains there was a thin, suspended
bridge crossing a chasm. Clef eyed it dubiously, but Ser-
rilryan proceeded on across without hesitation. She was so
unsteady he hastened to follow, so he could catch her if
she started to fall.

Halfway across he looked down. The chasm yawned so
deep and dark it made him dizzy. He did not enjoy the
sensation. Fortunately the chasm was narrow, and in mo-
ments they were across.

At last they came in sight of the Mound. Senflryan sank
in a heap before it, her waning energy exhausted. She had
done her job; she had delivered him safely.                   ;

But there was no one about. The sun shone down   i
brightly and the hills were alive with small animals and
birds—but no people. Clef, worried about the werebitch,
did not care to wait overlong for an introduction. "Ho
there!" he called. "I must meet with the Platinum Mound
Folk."

There was no answer. Could he have come to the wrong   '
place? "Serrilryan—" he began.                            ;

She changed with difficulty to dame-form. She was hag-   I
gard. "This is the place, music man. The Mound Folk go
not abroad by day. At night thou wilt see them."

"I don't think thou canst last till night," he said. "We
must have healing magic for thee now."

She smiled weakly. "It is too late for me, friend. My day
is done. One favor only I beg of thee—"

"AnythingI"                                         ;

"I would hear the Flute ere I die. Canst thou play an
epitaph for me?"

He knew this was final. She would expire within the
hour. He was at the realm of the Little Folk; he was no
longer obliged to wait. "Yes, it is time," he agreed. "There   !

Juxtaposition                      19

can be no better use for this instrument." He brought out
the Flute.

He played an ancient folk song that he felt was appro-
priate to this occasion: Tumbleweeds. It was the sort of
theme a wolf could appreciate, for it related to the free-
dom of the great outdoors, the rolling bushes called tum-
bleweeds drifting in the wind across the plain, cares of the
world left behind. Perhaps it was not that way, here in
Phaze, but he felt confident the mood would be conveyed.

From the first note, the Platinum Flute was potent, the
finest instrument he had ever played, enhanced by its
magic so that the sound transcended mere physics. The
music rippled, it flowed, it resonated; it was as if he were
flying, expanding, encompassing the landscape, the world,
the universe, the split infinities that were the frames of
science and magic. The sound loomed loud enough to
embrace all of Phaze, yet delicate enough to touch the
soul.

And the mountain trembled. The ground shook, but not
in the manner of an earthquake. It started shuddering
where he stood, and vibrated outward rhythmically, re-
sponding harmonically to the music of the Flute. The
effect intensified as he continued playing. Leaves fluttered
on trees, pine needles shook free of their moorings, and
the green grass of the slopes stood up tall and quivered like
the tines of tuning forks. The dear sky thickened; clouds
formed from nothing, flinging outward in rainbow-hued
bands. The sunlight dimmed; dusk coalesced.

Clef played on, caught in the wonder of the animation
the Flute was working. Serrilryan's fur stood out from her
body, charged. There was a canine smile on her face.
Washes of color traversed her, causing her human and
canine aspects to mingle aesthetically.

The ground shook harder. Branches fell from trees. The
roof of the Mound collapsed. The mountains in the Purple
range peeled off segments of themselves and settled sub-
stantially. Dust rose up. Animals Hed. The sky swirled
nearer and nearer.

The Little Folk appeared, for now there was no direct
sunlight to shrivel them. They stood in the twisting dust
and fog, staring while their Demesnes collapsed about




20                   juxtaposition
them. Yet such was the power of the Flute that no one

protested.
An avalanche formed and crashed downward. No one

moved. The rocks and debris coursed past them all, avoid-
ing living creatures, and advanced like a channeled flow of
water until they piled up in a caim over the body of
Serrilryan, the werebitch. She had died smiling. She had
heard the Platinum Flute; she had expired. Now she had

been buried.

Still Clef played. From the caim a spirit diffused, bil-
lowing and tenuous, extricating itself from the piled stones.
Now it looked like a wolf, and now like a woman. It was
Serrilryan's soul, departing her tired body at last.

Barb-tailed, horned, fire-clothed man-form devils hur-
ried across the slope to intercept that soul. Suddenly Clef
realized that the werebitch had spoken literally of Hell; she
had known her spirit would be taken there. But Clef re-
coiled from the concept. She had helped him loyally and
given her life in consequence. Surely that helped counter-
balance whatever prior evils there might have been in her
life. If he had any say at aU in the matter, she would go to
Heaven, where she wanted to be. He owed her that much.
He shifted his playing, questing for the tune that would

carry her soul upward.

Now from the troubled sky came wolves, flying without
wings, their fur shining, so that they seemed possessed of
light auras like halos. The music brought them down,
showed them the way they might otherwise have missed,

and marked the caim.

The devils reached the soul first. But the angel-wolves
arrived in time to balk the conveyance of the soul to Hell.
A battle ensued, the half-visible humanoid figures against
the half-visible canine figures. Spiritual fog and cloud and
dust roiled along with the physical. But the theme of the
Flute strengthened the wolves and weakened the devils. In
a moment the angel-wolves wrested the bitch soul from the
minions of Hell and loped up into the turbulent sky.

Yet before they departed entirely, the soul of Serrilryan
paused. She looked back toward Clef, and he knew she
was thanking him for a gift as unexpected as it was grati-
fying. Her sinful human component had been juxtaposed

21

juxtaposition

with her pure wolf component in death, nearer perfection
than they had been in life, and the forces of Heaven had
prevailed. She sent to earth one glance of purest apprecia-
tion that made the air about Clef sparkle. Then she turned
again and loped on toward Heaven with her divine com-
panions.

The Purple Mountains continued to shake and settle.
Dragons flew up from the southern marches; creatures
stirred all over Phaze. But Clef would not stop playing
until the bitch was safely ensconced in Heaven. He would
permit no loophole, no reversal.

Stile woke in alarm. The building was shakingi

"There seems to be an earthquake in progress," Sheen
said. "The Purple Mountain range is settling."

"That's no natural phenomenoni That's the Foreor-
dained!" Stile cried. "Now I realize that Clef is indeed the
ultimate magician, with power to level mountains and del-
icacy to send souls to Heaven."

"The Foreordained," Sheen repeated. "Clef is the one
destined to save Phaze?"

"He played the Platinum Flute, and the mountain trem-
bled and tumbled. That's the signal. I saw it in my dream
—and now I know it's true. My vision has caught up to
the present and affirmed it."

Sheen checked the newsscreen. "There has certainly
been a shake-up in Proton. Power has been disrupted all
along the southern range. Mine shafts have collapsed. If
that's the result of one melody on one flute, it means
magic is spilling over into the science frame."

"So it seems. I'm sure my encounter with Clef was not
coincidental. It was—foreordained. And my dream of his
progress—there has to be some reason for that. I suspect
he and I are destined to meet again."

"You could never stay out of mischief," she agreed.
"Now it's time to get ready for your Tourney match."

"Did anyone ever tell you you are inhumanly practical?
The end of the split infinity may be in the offing, and you
pack me off to a Game."

"Your match is foreordained too," she said compla-
cently.




Juxtaposition                      23

CHAPTER 2

Backgammon

It was Round Thirteen of the annual Tourney. Only three
players remained, two with one loss each. These two had
to play each other; the loser would be eliminated from the
Tourney, and the winner would meet the single undefeated
player.

The two who played were as different as seemed pos-
sible. One was a huge, fat, middle-aged man in voluminous
and princely robes inset with glittering gems. The other
was a tiny naked man, muscular and £t, in his thirties.

"Ah, Stile," the clothed man said affably. "I was hoping
to encounter you."

"You know of me, sir?"

"I always research my prospective opponents, serf. You
have been extremely busy recently. You have been chasing
around the landscape, crashing vehicles, and disappearing
between Rounds."

Stile was noncommittal. "My time between Rounds is
my own, sir."

"Except for what that girl robot demands. Is it fun
making time with a sexy machine?"

Stile knew the Citizen was trying to rattle him, to get
him tangled up emotionally so that he could not concen-
trate properly on the Game. It was a familiar technique.
Stile could not return the favor because all Citizens were
virtually anonymous to serfs, and in any event a serf could
not treat a Citizen with disrespect. So Stile would have to
take it—and play his best regardless. He was experienced
at this sort of thing; the Citizen would probably rattle
himself before he got to Stile.

It was time for the grid. Each man stood on one side of
the unit, looking at the screen. There were sixteen boxes
22

facing Stile, labeled across the top: 1. PHYSICAL 2.
MENTAL 3. CHANCE 4. ARTS, and down the side: A.
NAKED B. TOOL C. MACHINE D. ANIMAL. Stile's
panel was lighted by the letters.

"That was a very neat stunt you worked, last Round,"
the Citizen remarked. "Making that Amazon throw away
her win. Of course you know you won't be able to trick
me that way."

"Of course not, sir." Stile touched the TOOL indication.
That was his line of greatest strength.

The subgrid showed: 3B, Tool-Assisted Chance. Stile
groaned inwardly. The CHANCE column was the bane of
good players. It was difficult to make his skill count here.

"You don't like it, huh?" the Citizen taunted. "Figure it
to come up another slot machine, wash you out painlessly,
eh?"

This man really had researched Stile's prior Games of
the Tourney. The lone Game Stile had lost had been just
that way. "I am not partial to it, sir." As long as he
handled the needling without heat, he was gaining.

"Well, I'm partial to it! Know why? Because I'm lucky.
Try me on poker. Stile; I'll come up with a full house and
tromp you. Try me on blackjack; I'm all twenty-ones. The
breaks always go my way! That scares you, huh?"

The Citizen protested too much. That could indicate
weakness—or could be a ruse. Stile actually could handle
himself in games of chance; often there was more skill
than showed. He would try for a suitable variant. "Luck is
impartial, sir."

"You believe that? You fool! Try me on dice, if you
doubt!"

Stile made his selection. The Citizen had already made
his. The third grid showed: Board Games of Chance.

"Okay, sucker, try me on Monopoly!" the Citizen urged.

But when they played it through, it came up backgam-
mon. "My favorite!" the Citizen exclaimed. "Dice and bet-
ting! Watch me move!"

Stile thought he was bluffing. That bluff would be called.
Stile was expert at backgammon. It was only technically
a game of luck; skill was critical.

They adjourned to the boardroom. The table was ready.




24 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 25

There was no physical audience; the holograph would take
care of that.

"Now you know this game represents a year," the Citi-
zen said. "Twenty-four points for the hours of the day,
thirty pieces for the days of the month, twelve points in
each half-section for the months in the year."

"And the seven spots on the opposites of a die are the
days of the week," Stile said. "The two dice are day and
night. It hardly matches the symbolism of the ordinary
deck of playing cards or the figures of the chess set—sir."

They were playing a variant deriving in part from Acey-
Deucy, traditionally a navy game. The games of Mother
Earth had continued to evolve in the fashion of human
society, with some variants prospering and others becom-
ing extinct. In this one, no pieces were placed on the board
at the start; all started from the bar.

It was not necessary to enter all fifteen pieces on the
board before advancing the leaders. Yet it was still back-
gammon, the "back game," with pieces constantly being
sent back to the bar while they ran the gauntlet of oppos-
ing pieces. People were apt to assume that a given game
had an eternally fixed set of rules, when in fact there were
endless variations. Stile had often obtained an advantage
by steering a familiar game into an unfamiliar channel.

The Citizen was, as he claimed, lucky. He won the lead,
then forged ahead with double sixes, while Stile had to
settle for a two-to-one throw of the dice. Doubles were
valuable in backgammon, because each die could be used
twice. Thus the citizen's throw enabled him to enter four
men to the sixth point, while Stile entered only two. This
continued fairly steadily; the Citizen soon had all fifteen
men entered and well advanced, while Stile was slower.

Soon the two forces interacted. The Citizen hit the first
blot—in layman's language, he placed one of his men on
the spot occupied by one of Stile's men. That sent Stile's
man home to the bar, the starting place. "Sent you home
to your slut machine, didn't I?" he chortled. "Oh, let there
be no moaning at the barl"

That was a literary allusion to an ancient poem by
Tennyson of Earth. Stile was conversant with historical
literature, but made no response. The Citizen was showing

pseudoerudition; he was not the type to know any but the
most fashionable of quotes, and he had gotten this one
wrong. The correct line was, "and may there be no moan-
ing of the bar." Yet, mentally. Stile filled in the remainder:

"when I put out to sea." Tennyson had then been late in
life, knowing he would die before too long. That poem,
Crossing the Bar, had been a kind of personal epitaph.
When he put out to sea, in the figurative fashion of the
Norse boats for the dead, he hoped to see his Pilot, the
Deity, face to face. Those left behind in life should feel no
sorrow for him, for he, like the werewolf, had found his
ideal resting place. It was generally best to read the full
works of past literary figures, and to understand their
backgrounds, rather than to memorize quotes out of con-
text. But it was no use to go into all that with this great
boor and bore of a Citizen.

Well, Stile intended to send this obnoxious Citizen out
to sea. It was already apparent that the man was not a top
player; he depended on his luck too heavily, and on a
basic strategy of "making" points—of setting up two or
more men on a point, so that the opponent could neither
land there nor hit a blot. Luck and conservative play—a
good enough strategy for most occasions. Three out of
four times, a winning strategy.

But Stile was not an ordinary player. He depended not
on luck but on skill. Luck tended to equalize, especially on
an extended series, while skill was constant. That was what
gave the superior player the advantage, even in a game of
chance. It was necessary to take risks in order to progress
most efficiently. There would be some losses because of
these risks, but, overall, that efficiency would pay off. Stile
was already grasping the weakness of the Citizen's mode
of play. Probably the man had an imperfect notion of the
strategy of the doubling cube—and that could make all the
difference, regardless of his vaunted luck.

Soon the Citizen had a number of men in his home
board, ready to be borne off. The first player who bore
off all fifteen men would win the game, but not necessarily
the Round. This modification was scored by points; each
man left in play when the opponent finished was one point.
One hundred points was the Game. It could take several




26                      juxtaposition

games to accumulate the total. The key was to minimize
one's losses in a losing game, and maximize one's winnings
in a winning game. That was where the doubling cube
came in.

Best to test the man's level, however. Stile needed to
have a very clear notion of his opponent's vulnerability,
because the Citizen was not a complete duffer; he was"
just good enough to be dangerous. Luck did play an im-
portant part in backgammon, just as muscle did in wres-
tling; it had to be taken into account.

Stile rolled 3-2. As it happened, he was able to enter
two men and hit blots on the second and third points. It
was a good break, for the Citizen left few blots he could
possibly avoid. Thus Stile's 2 and 3 dice canceled the effect
of cumulative scores of twenty-one and twenty-two on the
Citizen's dice. Stile was making his limited luck match
the effect of his opponent's good luck. It was a matter of
superior management.

But the Citizen was hardly paying attention to the
moves. He was trying to undermine Stile's confidence, con-
vinced that even in a game of chance, a person's certainty
counted most. "A number of people have been wondering
where you disappear to between Rounds, little man. You
seem to walk down a certain service corridor, and never
emerge at the far end. Hours or even days later you
emerge, going the opposite direction. It is a food-machine
service corridor, yet you show no sign of feasting. Now
how can a man disappear from the board, like a piece
being sent to the bar? It is a mystery."

Stile continued playing. "People enjoy mysteries, sir."

The dice rolled; the men advanced. The Citizen's luck
held; he was gaining despite imperfect play. "Mysteries
exist only to be resolved. It is possible that you have
discovered something fantastic, like a curtain that sepa-
rates fact from fantasy? That you pass through this invis-
ible barrier to a world where you imagine you are impor-
tant instead of insignificant?"

So the man had done fairly thorough research into
Stile's Phaze existence too. Still, Stile refused to be baited.
"No doubt, sir."

"And can it really be true that in that fantasy you ride a

Juxtaposition                      27

unicom mare and associate with vampires and were-
wolves?"

"In fantasy, anything is possible," Stile said.

"Double," the Citizen said, turning the doubling cube to
two.

Now the game drew to a dose. The Citizen finished
first; Stile was left with eight men on the board. Doubled,
that was sixteen points against him.

They set up for the second game, since they were not
yet dose to the one hundred points necessary for the fin-
ish. The Citizen was obnoxiously affable; he liked winning.
Stile hoped he would get careless as well as overconfident.
With luck, the Citizen might even distract himself at a key
time by his determined effort to unnerve Stile.

Still, the Citizen's luck held. The man played indiffer-
ently, even poorly at times, but the fortune of the dice
sustained him. When he had a clear advantage, he dou-
bled, and Stile had to accept or forfeit the game. Then
Stile had a brief run of luck—actually, skillful exploitation
of the game situation—and doubled himself. "Double!"
the Citizen said immediately when his own turn came,
determined to have the last word and confident in his
fortune. Now the doubling cube stood at eight.

"I understand a little squirt like you can use magic to
snare some mighty fine-looking women," the Citizen said
as they played. "Even if they're taller than you."

"Many women are," Stile agreed. References to his
height did irritate him, but he had long since learned to
conceal this. He was 1.5 meters tall, or an inch shy of five
feet, in the archaic nomendature of Phaze.

The Citizen's infernal luck continued. There did seem to
be something to his daim about being lucky; he had cer-
tainly had far superior throws of the dice, and in this game,
supervised by the Game Computer, there could be no
question of cheating. He was winning this game too, by
a narrower margin than the last, but the eight on the
doubling cube gave every piece magnified clout. The Citi-
zen liked to double; maybe it related to his gambling urge.

"I guess there could be one really luscious doll who
nevertheless married a dwarf," the Citizen observed with a
smirk. "I guess she could have been ensorcelled."




28 Juxtaposition juxtaposition 29

"Must have been." But despite his refusal to be baited
about his recent marriage to the Lady Blue, Stile was
losing. If this special ploy did not work, he would wash
out of the Tourney. If only the luck would even out!

"Or maybe she has a hangup about midgets. Sort of like
miscegenation. Some people get turned on that way."

The Citizen was really trying! But Stile played on
calmly. "Some do, I understand."

"Or maybe pederasty. She likes to do it with children."

But the effect of that malicious needle was abated by the
Citizen's choice of the wrong concept. It was generally
applicable to the sexual motive of a male, not a female.
Still, Stile would gladly have dumped this oaf down a deep
well.

Stile lost this game too, down six men. Forty-eight more
points against him, a cumulative total of sixty-four. An-
other game like this would finish him.

The luck turned at last and he won one. But he had
only been able to double it once, and only picked up six
points. Then the Citizen won again: eight men, redoubled,
for thirty-two points. The score now stood at 96-6. The
next game could finish it.

Still the Citizen's amazing luck held. Had he, after all,
found some way to cheat, to fix the dice? Stile doubted it;

the Tourney precautions were too stringent, and this was
an important game, with a large audience. The throws had
to be legitimate. Science claimed that luck evened out in
the long run; it was difficult to prove that in backgammon.

Stile's situation was desperate. Yet there were ways.
Stile knew how to play the back game specialty, and now
was the time. When his position looked good, he doubled;

when the Citizen was clearly ahead, he doubled. But the
Citizen retained a general advantage, so Stile's doublings
seemed foolish.

Stile used the back game to interfere with the Citizen's
establishment on his home board. Because most of Stile's
men had been relegated to the bar, he had them in ready
position to attack the Citizen's men as they lined up for
bearing off. This sort of situation could be a lot more
volatile than many people thought. "Double," Stile said,
turning the cube.

"You're crazy," the Citizen said, redoubling in his turn.

Stile hit another blot. He needed more than this to
recover a decent position, but it helped.

The Citizen threw double sixes. That moved his blotted
man all the way from the bar to one space from the end.
His luck was still more than sufficient to swamp whatever
breaks Stile managed.

Stile doubled again, though he was still obviously be-
hind. The Citizen, when his turn came, laughed and dou-
bled once more. Now the cube stood at sixty-four, its
maximum. "You really want to go down big, tyke!"

They were reduced to five men each; the rest had been
borne off. The game was actually much closer than the
Citizen realized. Stile had already won the advantage he
sought. If the game had proceeded with only Stile's first
doubling, and he won by two men, all he would have
would be four more points. If he lost by the same margin,
however, the Citizen's four points would put him at one
hundred for final victory. But now the cube stood at sixty-
four, so that a two-man win by the Citizen would give him
the same victory by an unnecessary margin—while the
. same win by Stile would give him 128 points, at one stroke
enough for his final victory. So he had in effect evened it
up. Instead of being behind by ninety points, he had only
to win two points. The Citizen had been foolish to permit
the doubling to go to this level; he had thrown away a
major advantage.

"I hear some of these animals can change to human
form," the Citizen said. "I guess an animal in the form of
a woman could be a lot of fun to a lonely man."

Was there anything this slob did not know about Phaze,
or any limit to his crudity of insinuation? Stile allowed a
little ire to show, deliberately. "It is a different frame, sir,
with different natural laws. Those animals have human
intelligence."

The Citizen gleefully pounced on this. "So you have
sampled the wares of the mares and the britches of the
bitchesi" He was hardly paying attention to the back-
gammon game in his voyeuristic lust. He wanted to make
Stile angry and, in seeming success, he was letting the
means preempt the ends. This was always ethically prob-




30 Juxtaposition

lematical, and often strategically unsound. The Citizen
was setting himself up for a fall. If only the luck evened
out!

Stile had a good roll of the dice. He hit two blots, and
the Citizen hardly noticed. "I don't see that it is any of
your business, sir, no disrespect intended."

"With animalsl" the Citizen exclaimed, smiling broadly.
"You admit it!"

"I don't deny it, sir," Stile said, obviously nettled.

"And did they bother to change form each time?" the
Citizen demanded, almost drooling. He was hardly looking
at the board, playing automatically and poorly. "Maybe
sometimes a bitch stayed in her dog-form, just for the
novelty?"

Stile wondered just what sort of bestiality lurked in the
secret dreams of this nasty man. Perhaps this was the
phenomenon of projection, in which a person with illicit
desires projected the realization of certain acts onto others.
The Citizen was giving himself away without realizing it.

Stile continued to parry him verbally, taking the worst
of it, though he had the ability to reverse the onus at any
time. He was tacitly egging the man on. Meanwhile, he
exploited the rolls of the dice skillfully, and soon had
gained a net advantage. The Citizen could have prevented
this, had he been paying similar attention. But his morbid
fascination with Stile's supposed exploits with shape-chang-
ing females had done him in. By the time he became
aware of the trap, it was too late; even his amazing luck
could not make up for his squandered opportunities.

They entered the final stage, and both resumed bearing
off men. For once Stile had better throws of the dice, and
finished two men ahead.

It took a moment for the Citizen to absorb the signifi-
cance. He had been so far ahead, he knew subjectively
that it would take a prohibitively massive turn of fortune
to deprive him of victory. No such turn had occurred.
Now his eyes fixed on the number 64 at the top of the
doubling cube, and he saw that this narrow margin of two
pieces had at one stroke washed him out of the Tourney.

"You must visit Phaze some day, sir," Stile said brightly.
"I know just the bitch for you."

CHAPTER 3

Honeymoon

Stile crossed the curtain at the usual place, emerging from
the food-servicing hall to the deep forest of Phaze. In a
moment a unicorn trotted up. But it wasn't Neysa. This
one was slightly larger, male, and his coat was deep dark
blue except for the two red socks on his hind feet.

"Clipl" Stile exclaimed, surprised. "I expected—"

The unicorn metamorphosed into a young man garbed
in blue shirt, furry trousers, red socks, floppy hat, gloves,
and boots. His resemblance to the unicorn was clear to
anyone conversant with the forms. "She's off getting bred,
at long last. The Herd Stallion's keeping her with the herd
until she foals. That's S.O.P."

"Yes, of course," Stile agreed, disappointed. He found
his hidden clothes and dressed quickly; it would not do to
travel naked here, though there was really no firm conven-
tion. He wanted only the best for Neysa, his best friend
in this frame, yet he felt empty without her company. But
he had made a deal with the Herd Stallion to release her
for breeding when his mission of vengeance was finished;

now that he had dispatched the Red Adept, it was time.
Time for relaxation, recovery, and love. Time to be with
the lovely Lady Blue.

"That was the funniest thing," Clip said, evidently fol-
lowing the thrust of Stile's thoughts. "Thou didst marry
the Lady, then skipped off without even—"

"An idiosyncracy of the situation," Stile said shortly.
He had departed without consummating the marriage be-
cause of a prophecy that he would have a son by the Lady
Blue; he knew he would survive the dangerous mission
ahead of him if he only waited to generate that child
thereafter, since such prophecies had the force of law. But
31

32 juxtaposition

now the barbs of the ugly Citizen were fresh in his mind,
making this subject sensitive. "You're volunteering to be
my mount?"

"Neysa intimated gently that I'd get homed at the
wrong end if I didn't," Clip admitted. "Besides, thou dost
have interesting adventures."

"I'm only going to honeymoon with my wife."

"That's what I mean." Clip shifted to his natural form,
his horn playing with the sound of a saxophone—a bar of
the wedding march, trailing into a tune with .risque con-
notations.

Stile jumped on the unicorn's back, landing deliberately
hard. Clip blew out one more startled note and took off.
The velocity of the unicorn was greater than that of the
horse because it was enhanced by magic; yet the two types
of creatures were closely akin. As Clip himself had put it,
once: as dose as men were to apes. Stile was uncertain
what freighting accompanied that statement, but had never
challenged it. Man had intelligence and science the ape
lacked; unicorns had intelligence and magic the horses
lacked.

Soon they emerged from the forest and were racing over
the fields toward the moated castle that was the heart of
the Blue Demesnes. "Dost thou happen to know how Clef
from Proton fared?" Stile inquired. "I gave him the Plati-
num Flute and sent him to the Little Folk, but I've been
too busy to follow further. I'm sure you're up on all the
news."

Clip blew an affirmative note. He was the gossipy kind.

"Did Clef arrive safely?" Stile was interested in verifying
the accuracy of his dream. The frames had always been
firmly separated; if his dream were true, it meant that that
separation was beginning to fuzz, at least for him.

The unicorn sounded yes again. His sax-hom was more
mellow than Neysa's harmonica-horn, though less clever
on trills. Like her, he could almost speak in musical notes,
making them sound like yes, no, maybe, and assorted
other words, particularly colloquialisms. Actually, uni-
corns could express whole sentences in chords, but this
was a separate mode that owed little to archaic English.

juxtaposition                      33

Stile was coming to understand that language too, but his
grasp of it was as yet insecure.

"Was he—is he by any chance the one the Platinum
Elves called the Foreordained?"

Again the affirmative.

"Then that earthquake—we felt it in Proton—that was
the shaking of the mountains when he played?" But this
had become rhetorical; he had the answer. The frames had
certainly juxtaposed in this respect. "I wonder what that
means?"

Now Clip had no answer. No one except the Little Folk
of the Mound knew the significance of the Foreordained.
And the all-knowing Oracle, who answered only one ques-
tion in the lifetime of each querist.

Yet the arrival of the Foreordained suggested that the
end of Phaze was near, according to another prophecy.
That bothered Stile; he had worked so hard to secure his
place here. Was he to be denied it after all?

Well, he was determined to snatch what joy he might, in
what time remained. On the cosmic scale, the end might
be centuries distant. Magic prophecies were devious things,
not to be trusted carelessly. People had died depending on
misinterpreted omens.

That brought him back to the manner in which he had
secured his own fortune by postponing his fathering of a
son. He was eager to get on with it. He had loved the Lady
Blue from the first time he had encountered her. He had
never before met such a regal, intelligent, and desirable
woman. But she was the widow of his other self, and
that had made things awkward. Now she was his, and he
would never leave her—except for one more necessary trip
to the frame of Proton, to try for the final Round of the
Tourney. It really was not as important to him as it once
had seemed, but he had to give it his best try.

They galloped up to the prettily moated little castle.
Stile vaulted off as they entered the courtyard. The Lady
Blue, his vision of delight, rushed to his arms. She was
of course garbed in blue: headdress, gown, slippers. She
was all that he desired.

"Are we ready?" he inquired when the initial sweetness
of the embrace eased.

34

Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

35

"I have been ready since we wed, but thou didst depart
in haste," she said, teasing him.

"Never again, Ladyl"

"Hinblue is saddled."

"We have already traveled much of the eastern curtain.
Shall we pick up at the Platinum Demesnes?"

She did not reproach him about his concern for Clef's
welfare, the obvious reason to pass the region of the Little
Folk. "As my Lord Blue desires."

"Wilt thou condone magic for the start?"

She nodded radiantly. "Magic is the substance of my
Lord Adept."

They mounted their steeds, and Stile played his good
harmonica, summoning his magic. His Adept talent was
governed by music and words, the music shaping the
power, the words the application. Actually, his mind was
the most important factor; the words mainly fixed the time
of implementation. "Conduct us four," he sang» "to the
platinum shore."

dip snorted through his hom: shore?

But the magic was already taking hold. The four of
them seemed to dissolve into liquid, sink into the ground,
and flow rapidly along and through it south-southeast. In a
moment they re-formed beside the Mound of the Platinum
Elves. There was the fresh caim of Serrilryan the were-
bitch, exactly as his vision-dream had shown it.

"Anything I visualize as a shore, is a shore," Stile ex-
plained. "There does not have to be water." But as it
happened, there was some cloud cover here, thickest in the
lower reaches, so that the descending forest disappeared
into a sealike expanse of mist. They stood on a kind of
shore. Almost, he thought he saw wolf shapes playing on
the surface of that lake of mist.

"And we were conducted—like the electricity of Proton-
frame," the Lady commented. "Methought thou wouldst
provide us with wings to fly."

A dusky elf, garbed in platinum armor to shield his
body from a possible ray of sunlight, appeared. He glanced
up at Stile. "Welcome, Blue Adept and Lady," he said.

"Thy manner of greeting has improved since last we
visited," the Lady Blue murmured mischievously.

"As well it might have," the elf agreed. "We know thee
now."

He showed them into the Mound. Stile noted that the
structure had been hastily repaired, with special shorings.
Evidently the destruction wrought by the Foreordained's
Flute had not entirely demolished it. Stile hoped there had
not been much loss of life in the collapse. Clip and Hin-
blue remained outside to graze the verdant, purple-tinted
turf.

A deeply darkened and wrinkled elf awaited them in-
side. This was Pyreforge, chief of this tribe of Dark Elves.
"Thy friend is indeed the Foreordained," he said gravely.
"Our trust in thee has been amply justified."

"Now wilt thou tell the meaning?" Stile inquired. "We
are on our honeymoon. Yet my curiosity compels."

"Because thou art on thy honeymoon, I will tell thee
only part," the old elf said. "Too soon wilt thou learn the
rest."

"Nay! If it is to be the end of Phaze, I must know
now."

"It be not necessarily the end, but perhaps only a signifi-
cant transition. That much remains opaque. But the deci-
sion is near—a fortnight hence, perhaps, no more than
two. Take thy pleasure now, for there will come thy great-
est challenge."

"There is danger to my Lord Blue?" the Lady asked
worriedly.

"To us all. Lady. How could we survive if our frame be
doomed?"

"We can not head it off?" Stile asked.

"It will come in its own time. Therefore put it from thy
mind; other powers are moving."

Stile saw that Pyreforge would not answer directly on
this subject, and the elf could not be pushed. "The Fore-
ordained—what is his part in this? A title like that—"

"Our titles hardly relate to conventional human mythol-
ogy or religion. This one merely means he was destined to
appear at this time, when the curtain grows visible and
tension mounts between the frames. The great Adepts of
the past foresaw this crisis and foreordained this duty."

"What duty?" Stile asked. "Clef is merely a musician. A




36                      juxtaposition

fine one, granted, the best I know—but no warrior, no
Adept. What can he do?"

"No Adept?" Pyreforge snorted. "As well daim the
Platinum Flute be no instrumenti He can play the dead to
Heaven and crumble mountains by his melody—and these
be only the fringes of his untrained power. Once we have
trained him to full expertise—he is the Foreoidainedl"

So Earth mythology might not relate, but the implica-
tion of significance did. "So he is, after all, Adept? He
seemed ordinary to me—but perhaps I did not hear him
play in Phaze."

Pyreforge smiled wryly. "Thou didst hear him, Adept.
Music relates most intimately to magic, as thou shouldst
know."

So the elf knew of Stile's visioni "And Clef is the finest
musician to come to Phaze," Stile said, seeing it. "But
what exactly is he to do? May we say hello to him?"

"You may not," the old elf said. This usage always
sounded incongruous to Stile here, where "thee" and
"thou" were standard—but of course it was the correct
plural form. "His power be enormous, but he be quite new
to it and has much to learn and little time ere he master
his art. We need no more shaking of our mountainsi He be
deep in study for the occasion he must attend and may not
be disturbed."

"What occasion?" Stile asked with growing frustration.

But still the elf would not respond directly. "Thou shalt
meet him when it be time. Lord Blue, and all will be
clarified. Leave us to teach the Foreordained his music.
Go now on thy honeymoon; thou must recuperate and
restore thine own powers for the effort to come."

So it seemed. They were teaching Clef music? This was
either humor or amazing vanityl Disgruntled, Stile thanked
the diminutive, wrinkled elf and departed. "I don't feel
comfortable being ignorant of great events, especially when
there are hints they relate intimately to me," he muttered
to the Lady.

"How dost thou think I felt, cooped up in the Blue
Demesnes whilst thou didst go out to live or die?"

"I don't recall thy staying cooped long—"

"Let's ride, my Lord."

Juxtaposition                      37

Stile smiled. She had the feminine way of changing the
subject when pressed. She was not a woman to let fate roll
over her unchallenged, and her present deference to him
was merely part of the honeymoon. Had he desired a
creature to honor his every foible, he would have loved
Sheen. The Lady Blue would always be someone to reckon
with.

They mounted and rode. Pyreforge was right: the cur-
tain was brighter now, faintly scintillating as it angled
across the slopes of the Purple Mountains. It followed
the contours of the terrain in its fashion; the curtain ex-
tended vertically until it became too faint for them to see,
and evidently continued below the ground similarly. As
the land fell away, it exposed more of the curtain. There
was no gap; the curtain was continuous.

That was what intrigued Stile—that ubiquitous transi-
tion between frames. The landscapes of Proton and Phaze
were identical, except that Proton was a barren, polluted
world where science was operative, while Phaze was a
fresh, verdant world of magic. Only those people who
lacked alternate selves in the other frame could cross be-
tween them. No one seemed to know why or how the
curtain was there, or what its mode of operation was. It
just served as the transition between frames, responsive to
a wish from one side, a spell from the other.

They intended to follow the curtain in its generally
westward extension until it terminated at the West Pole.
Stile had been increasingly curious about the curtain, and
the West Pole held a special fascination for him because it
didn't exist on any other world he knew. Now he had an
excuse to satisfy both interests—by making them part of
his honeymoon.

As the Blue Adept, he was one of the most powerful
magicians in Phaze; riding a unicorn—ah, he missed
Neysa!—he had some of the best transportation and pro-
tection available; and in the company of the lovely Lady
Blue—oh, what an occasion this would be!

"I want to make a map," he said, remembering. "A map
of Phaze, as I know it now and as I will discover it, and of
the curtain in all its curvatures."

"The curtain is straight," the Lady said.

38 Juxtaposition

"Straight? It meanders all over the frame!"

"Nay, Lord, it is the frame that meanders," she assured
him. "When we follow the curtain, we bear due west."

Stile decided not to argue. After all, she was his new
bride and she was heart-throbbingly delightful, and an
argument at this time would be awkward. Nevertheless, he
would map Phaze as he perceived it.

He played his harmonica, bringing the magic to him.
Then he set the instrument aside and sang: "Place on tap a
contour map."

True to his visualization, the map appeared—a neatly
folded pseudo-parchment. He opened it out and contem-
plated its lines and colors. There were the White Moun-
tains to the north, the Purple Mountains to the south, the
sites of the Blue, Black, Yellow, White, Brown, and—
former—Red Demesnes, and the curtain winding around
and between them. Contour lines indicated the approxi-
mate elevations.

But there were sizable blank areas. This map covered
only the territory Stile knew. He had traveled around a lot
of Phaze recently, but there was more to explore. He
expected to enjoy filling in the rest of this map. The
plotting of the curtain should take care of much of it,
since it meandered—went straight?—past most of the sig-
nificant establishments of this frame.

"No one uses a map in Phaze," the Lady protested,
intrigued.

"I am not from Phaze," he retorted. He showed her the
map. "Now as I make it, the curtain should bear west a
day's leisurely travel, then veer north here to pass the
palace of the Oracle and on by the Yellow Demesnes near
the White Mountains. That will be a couple days' ride.
Then it must curve southwest to intersect the Black
Demesnes here—"

"The curtain is straight," she repeated.

"Humor me, beloved. Then on until we reach the West
Pole, somewhere over here. The whole trip should take
a week, which will leave us—"

"Thou art a fool," she said pleasantly. "Little thou
knowest of Phaze."

Juxtaposition                      39

"That's why I'm exploring it," he agreed. "Thou art wife
of a fool, fool."

She leaned toward him, and her mount obligingly closed
the gap. They kissed, riding side by side, while Clip played
another suggestive tune. Stile gave the unicorn a sharp
little kick in the flank with his left heel. Clip emitted a
blast of musical laughter with an undertone of Bronx
cheer and flicked his tail across Stile's back in the familiar
fly-swatting gesture.

"Now let's move," Stile said as the kiss ended.

The two steeds broke into a canter, following the cur-
tain down the hill, through a valley, and up a wooded
slope. Stile loved riding; it was the thing he did best. The
Lady paralleled him, balancing smoothly, her hair flying
out in a golden splay. She, too, was a fine rider and she
had a fine steed, though no horse could match a unicorn
in full exertion. Stile probably could have borrowed an-
other unicorn from the herd, but there had been no point.
This was no dangerous mission, but a gentle romance.
Hinblue was a very good mare, the offspring of the Blue
Stallion and the Hinny—the best equine heritage in Phaze.
Stile remained sorry his friend Neysa was not here to share
the trip with him—but realized that Neysa might be jeal-
ous of the Lady Blue, with some reason. Maybe Neysa's
breeding had been mostly a pretext to separate herself
from this excursion. Well, Clip was good, if spirited, com-
pany.

Time passed. The curtain veered to the south, forcing
them to cross over the height of the Purple range, rather
than at any natural pass. Their steeds slowed to a walk,
and the air became chill. There was no snow here, but the
vegetation turned bluish as if from cold, and then full
purple. That was what gave the range its color, of course;

he should have known. Finally Stile cast a spell to make
them warm—himself and the Lady and the two animals—
so that no one would have to overexert to maintain body
heat.

Then, on the steep downslope, he cast another spell to
enable them all to float through the air, resting. A harpy
popped out of a hole in a cliff, saw the two equines with

40

juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

41

their riders, all drifting blithely in midair, and popped
hastily back into her hole. "Just as well," the Lady Blue
remarked. "That creature's scratch is poisonous, and they
oft resent intrusion into their demesnes."

Clip snorted. Unicorns were invulnerable to most magic
and had no fear of harpies. Stile, remembering how the
werebitch Serrilryan had died, knew that if the harpy had
attacked, he would have reacted with ferocity perhaps un-
becoming to this occasion.

Then they passed the cliffside nest of a griffin. Three
cubs poked their beaks up to peer at the weird procession.
In the distance there was the birdlike scream of an adult,
probably the mother, aware that her babies were being
disturbed. A griffin was a Eghting animal, almost as fierce
as a dragon; unicorns did not normally seek combat with
this species. Stile, of course, could handle it—but he
elected to hasten their descent, getting well away from the
nest before the mother griffin appeared. Why seek trouble?

At the southern foot of the range an extensive plain
commenced. Evening was approaching, and in the slanting
sunlight they saw shapes in the sky like grotesque birds.
"Dragons," the Lady Blue murmured. "This is dragon
country."

"If any come for us, we'll simply step across the cur-
tain," Stile said. Again it was easier to avoid than to fight;

he had no desire to waste magic or to prove his power. A
unicorn, a werewolf, or a vampire could change forms as
often as it wished, because that was inherent in such crea-
tures' nature, while Stile could use a particular spell only
once. When he had to, he could accomplish more by
magic than any other creature and could change one crea-
ture to another—but eventually he would run out of new
spells. Magic was best saved for true emergencies.

"What of Hinblue?" the Lady asked.

"Um, yes. Maybe she can cross the curtain too."

"She could not survive in Proton-frame. There is no good
air there, no grazing. And what of thine own mount?"

"Have no fear for me. Lady," Clip said, changing to
man-form. "As a hawk, I can escape. But I cannot cross
the curtain. In Proton I would be reduced to but a horse,
and unable to cross back."

"Then I will use magic if the need arises," Stile decided.

"My lord, there is no time like the present," the Lady
said. For a shape was winging toward them.

Stile had made up and memorized a number of spells,
including some dragon restraints. In this case he would
simply cause the dragon to forget it had seen anything
interesting here.

But as the creature flew closer. Stile squinted at it. This
was a peculiar dragon. The wings were wrong, the tail, the
head—

"Why, that's no dragon," the Lady said.

Clip snapped his fingers. "That's a thunderbird! I didn't
know there were any left in these parts."

"I don't have a specific spell for thunderbirds," Stile said
dubiously. "111 have to go to a general one."

"No need," the Lady said. "The bird is full of sound
and fury—"

The creature swooped close, its wings spreading hugely,
then sweeping together in a deafening clap of thunder.

"Signifying rain," Clip finished, as the drenchpour
commenced.

Hastily Stile spelled into existence a large tent, already
set up and guyed. The rain beat down on its canvas so
heavily that he had to spell additional supports. Water
seeped under the edges, and fog drifted through, coating
them with condensation. A little frog appeared and
croaked contentedly.

The other three were with him, but soon Clip returned
to unicorn-form and moved outside to graze; the rain did
not bother his equine form very much. Hinblue followed
him out; grazing was always worthwhile, and the dragons
would avoid this storm.

That left the Lady Blue. Stile turned to her. "I had
thought of sunshine and sweet music for this occasion.
Still—"

"Desist thy stalling," she said, and opened her arms.

Thereafter, the storm disappeared from his conscious-
ness. It was a long, ecstatic night. In the morning he woke
in a fine bed of hay and feathers, so concluded he must
have done some incidental conjuring, but none of that




42                      Juxtaposition

remained in his memory. He had only his awareness of the
Lady Blue—his woman at last.

There was a neat pile of assorted fruits at the tent
entrance; Clip had evidently scouted around in the night
and harvested what he thought was appropriate. At the top
of the mound was passion fruit, and below were apples,
cherries, and bananas. Symbolistic humor of the equine
kind. They had an excellent meal.

They resumed their ride. Clip had the sense not to play
any more ribald melodies on his sax-hom, but on occasion
he could not quite contain a faint musical snigger.

The curtain wandered back up the slope of the moun-
tains, having no regard for the convenience of travelers—
as well it might not; Stile's party was probably the Erst to
make this particular trek. Here on the southern side, flow-
ers of many colors abounded, and the bushes and trees
were highly varied. Birds flitted, and squirrels and rabbits
scurried. On occasion a grassy round trapdoor would open
and a little head would pop out—hermit-elves, harmless.

Then they came to a river. It cut across the curtain,
deep and swift—and a formidable steam-breathing water
dragon inhabited it.

They halted, eyeing the monster. The monster eyed them
back. Slowly a purple tongue came out and moistened its
chops. The mere sight of them made this creature salivate.
This hardly seemed a safe passage.

Stile pondered which spell to use. Immobilization
seemed best; he didn't want to hurt this animal. Yet that
was such a useful spell for emergencies that he hated to
use it routinely. Again he was up against the ad hoc nature
of magic; once any specific spell was used, it was gone. All
Adepts used magic sparingly, never squandering it. Stile, a
relative newcomer to the art, tended to use it more freely
than was wise; the novelty had not yet worn off. Until
recently, there had been so many challenges to his well-
being that he had hardly worried about wasting spells;

what use to save them for a nonexistent future?

Now he was a fairly secure married man, becoming
daily more conservative. So he pondered: Was there any
mundane way to pass by this dragon? The creature was

juxtaposition                      43

limited to the water, having flippers in lieu of wings and
frogs' feet. This was, after all, a very restricted threat.

Again the Lady's thoughts were parallel to his own. She
had an uncanny insight into his mind, perhaps because she
had had much longer experience with him than he had had
with her, odd as that might seem in any other frame than
this. He had in fact been momentarily dismayed during the
night by her almost-too-ready anticipation of his desires;

none of this was really new to her. "It would be a long
trek around the river, methinks, for the dragon would pace
us. Clip could change to hawk-form and fly safely across,
but Hinblue has no such magic."

"This becomes a challenge," Stile said. "For most of my
life I existed without the benefit of magic. A year ago I
would have found a way across without sorcery; I should
be able to do it now."

"Though it take but a fortnight," she murmured, smiling.

"The curtain—" Stile began, but cut that off. He kept
forgetting Hinbluel

"Put my steed not through that torture gratuitously," the
Lady agreed.

Clip changed to man-form. "Thou wilt be all day on
this. I can get us across now."

"Oh?" Stile asked, not entirely pleased. "How?"

"By decoying this dragon downstream while the three of
you swim. The average dragon is not smart enough for that
ruse."

Of course! Simplicity itself. "Thou are smarter than L
today," Stile said ruefully.

"Naturally. I'm a unicorn," Clip said generously. "I did
not dissipate my strength all night in pointless heroics." He
changed back to his usual form and snorted insultingly at
the dragon, adding an obnoxious gesture with his hom.
Unicorns could convey considerable freighting in this
manner. The dragon oriented on him, steam pressure
building up, measuring the distance it might strike.

Clip stayed just out of range, trotting downstream with
a lewd swish of his tail. He played a few bars of music, and
Stile could just about make out the words: "The worms
crawl in, the worms crawl out . . ." Dragons were the

44 Juxtaposition

monarchs of the kingdom of worms, and were sensitive to
such disparaging references. This dragon followed Clip
briskly, hoping the unicorn would stray just within range
of fang or steam.

Soon Stile and the Lady stripped and swam safely
across with Hinblue, holding their garments aloft. They
were, after all, prevailing without magic.

"This is fun," Stile murmured, contemplating her body
in the clear water. "Shall we dally a bit?"

"Until the dragon joins the party?" she inquired sweetly.

They climbed out at the far bank and shook themselves
dry in the sun. Stile tried not to stare; this was a type of
motion he had never seen done by a woman of her con-
struction, though he had lived most of his life in a society
of nudity.

There was a small coughing sound. Both Stile and the
Lady turned—and discovered the dragon was watching
too, its labile lips pursed into the semblance of a whistle.

Stile experienced a rapidly developing emotion. He tried
to control it, but in a moment it overwhelmed him. It was
mirth. He burst out laughing. "Oh, I'll bet that monster
doesn't see what I seel"

The Lady looked down at herself, frowning. "It
doesn't?"

"It sees the most delicious morsel in two frames. I
see—"

"Never mind what thou seest," she said with mock se-
verity. "I take thy meaning." She was neither self-
conscious nor angry. She had one of the finest bodies in
the frame and knew it.

A hawk arrived, swooping low and converting to
unicorn-form. Clip was ready to resume the journey.

Soon the curtain veered north, crossing the mountain
range again. Fortunately this occurred at a natural pass, so
they were able to get past expeditiously.

They emerged into the rolling countryside that was the
main grazing range of the unicorns. Now progress was
swift—but the distance was long. They were not yet near
the Oracle's palace before night overtook them and forced
another halt.

Again the animals grazed, and Stile was about to con-

Juxtaposition

45

jure another tent when the Lady stayed him. "Expend not
thy magic superfluously, my Lord. Tonight the open sky

suffices for us."

"If that is what thou dost desire, that is what thou shalt
have," he agreed. He gathered straw and moss to fashion a
bed, and they lay down side by side and looked up at the

moons.

"Oh, see—the blue moon risesi" she cried, squeezing his

hand.

"Our moon," he agreed. This was sheer delight, being

with her, sharing her incidental pleasures.

"Oh, play, my Lord, play," she begged.

Obediently Stile found his harmonica and brought it to
his mouth. But something stayed him—an ominous
though not unpleasant feeling. He concentrated and placed
it. "It was not far from here that I first found this instru-
ment, or thought I found it. Here in the open, riding with
Neysa. I conjured it without knowing."

"It is all that remains of my former Lord," she said.
"His music and power have since found lodging in thee.
Great was my grief at his loss, yet greater is my joy in

thee."

"Still it bothers me how he died. Surely he could have
saved himself, had he tried."

She stiffened. "I told thee how the demon amulet
choked him, so that he could make neither music nor
spell."

"Aye. But was not this harmonica always with him?"

"Always. But he could not play it, either, if—"

"And the golem did not remove it?"

"Nay. It was gone ere the golem came."

"Then how did it get out here in the fields for me to
conjure? Or, if it were not here, how did it get wherever it
hid? It remained not at the Blue Demesnes."

"True," she agreed thoughtfully. "Long and long I
searched for it, but it was not with his body."

"Which is strange," Stile said. "He might have conjured
it away from him in the instant he knew he would die—
but why then did he not use his magic to protect himself?
And why did he deny thee the inheritance of his prize
possession? Such malice was not his nature, I am sure."

46 Juxtaposition

For Stile himself would not have done that. Not without
excellent reason.

"He could not have conjured iti" she said, disturbed.

"Then he must have placed it in the field, or hidden it
elsewhere, before he died. And that suggests—"

"That he knew he was slated to die!" she exclaimed,
shocked. "He deprived himself of his most valued posses-
sion. But even without it, no one could have lulled him,
were he on guard!"

"Unless he intended to permit it," Stile said.

Her shock turned to honor. "No! Nothing I did, no will
of mine should have caused him—"

"Of course not," Stile agreed quickly. "He would never
have done it because of thee."

"Then what is thine import?"

"That perhaps he knew something, received an omen,
that caused him to accept what was coming."

She considered that for some time, her hand clenching
and unclenching in his. "Yet what could possibly justify—
what was fated?"

"I wish I knew." For Stile's own passage across the
curtain had been enabled by that demise of his alternate
self. If the Blue Adept had sought to eliminate his brand
of magic from the frame, he had acted in vain, for Stile
performed it now.

That night they did not make love. They lay and
watched the blue moon, and Stile played gently on the
mysterious harmonica, and it was enough. Slowly sleep
overtook them.

"Be at ease," a man's voice came from nearby. "We
have met before. Adept."

Stile controlled his reaction. He still held the harmonica;

he could summon his power rapidly. In a moment he
placed the half-familiar voice: "Yes, at the Unolympics,
Green Adept." He did not want trouble with another Adept
—especially not when the Lady Blue was close enough to
be hurt by the fallout. He was as yet unable to see the man;

probably Green had employed a spell of invisibility, with
related obfuscations. Otherwise he could not have gotten
by the alert equines.

"I come in peace. Wilt thou grant truce for a dialogue?"

juxtaposition

47

"Certainly." Stile was relieved. By custom verging on
law. Adepts did not deceive each other in such matters.
What in Phaze could this man want with him at this

time?                                    ,

The Adept became visible. He was a pudgy man ot
middle age, garbed in green. He looked completely in-
offensive—but was in fact one of the dozen most powerful
people of Phaze. "Thank thee. I will intrude not long."

A hawk appeared silently behind the Adept. Stile gave
no sign. He did not expect treachery, but if it came, there
would suddenly be a unicorn's hom in action. If dip
attacked the Green Adept, he risked getting transformed
into a clod of dung, but Stile knew he would take that risk
if necessary. "Surely thou hast reason."

"It is this. Blue: my sources give thee warning. Go not
to the West Pole. Great mischief lies there."

"There is no mischief there," the Lady Blue protested.
"It is a sacred place, under truce, like the palace of the

Oracle."

"Dost thou think no mischief lies with the Oracle?"

Stile chuckled. "Excellent point. Green. But the Lady
and I are on our honeymoon, and our excursion to the
West Pole has private significance. Canst thou be more
explicit?"

"Why shouldst thou care if mischief comes to a rival
Adept?" the Lady demanded. "Thou didst evince no
concern. Green, when the life of Blue hung in peril be-
fore."

That was an understatement. No other Adept had lifted
a finger or made a spell either to warn or to assist the Blue
Adept in his severe crisis that had left two Adepts dead 01
mined. This sudden concern was suspicious.

"Needs must I then elaborate," Green said heavily. "My
Demesnes lie athwart thy route. I would let fhee pass
unscathed, knowing thy mission—but by that acquies-
cence I commit myself to thy fate. This is not my desire. I
want no part of what befalls thee. Go not to the West
Pole—but an thou must go, then go not through the
Green Demesnes."

That made sense. The Green Adept had no personal
interest in Stile; he merely wanted to make certain he was

48                      Juxtaposition

not implicated in what happened to Stile. If a prophecy
decreed doom to all who might facilitate Stile's approach
to the West Pole, this step exonerated the Green Adept.

"Now I seek no trouble with thee," Stile began. "But the
Lady and I planned to follow the curtain to its terminus,
and—"

"And we can bypass the Green Demesnes, in the inter-
est of courtesy," the Lady Blue finished.

Stile shrugged. "The Lady has spoken. Set out wamers
at thy boundaries, and we shall there detour."

"I shall," Green agreed. "Since thou dost humor my
preference, I offer one final word: my sources suggest that
if thou dost go to the West Pole, thou wilt suffer griev-
ously in the short term, and in the moderate term will
incur the enmity of the most powerful forces of the frame.
I urge thee once more to give up this quest. There are
other suitable places to honeymoon. The Green Demesnes
themselves will be opened to thee, shouldst thou care to
tarry there instead."

"I thank thee for thy advice," Stile said. "Yet it seems
the end of Phaze draws nigh, and powerful forces already
dispose themselves in readiness. The Foreordained has ap-
peared. What is fated, is fated, and I am ready if not eager
to play my part."

"As thou dost choose." The Green Adept made a signal
with the fingers of his left hand and disappeared.

"I mislike these omens," the Lady said. "Methought our
troubles were over."

"Loose ends remain, it seems. I had hoped we could let
them be for at least this fortnight."

"Surely we can," she agreed, opening her arms to him.
The hawk flew quietly away. The weapon of the unicorn
had not, after all, been needed.

Next day they resumed the ride north. Stile made a
small spell to enhance Hinblue's velocity and let Clip run
at full speed. They fairly flew across the rolling terrain.
Fire jetted from the unicorn's nostrils, and his hooves grew
hot enough to throw sparks. Unicorns, being magic, did
not sweat; they ejected surplus heat at the extremities.

After a time they slowed. Stile brought out his har-

juxtaposition                      49

monica and played. Clip accompanied him on his saxo-
phone-voiced horn, and the lady sang. The magic closed
about them, seeming to thicken the air, but it had no force
without Stile's verbal invocation.

"We can camp the night at the Yellow Demesnes,"
Stile said. "The curtain clips a comer of—"

"By no means!" the Lady snapped, and Clip snorted.

Stile remembered. She didn't like other Adepts, and Yel-
low liked to take a potion to convert herself from an old
crone to a luscious young maid—without otherwise chang-
ing her nature. Also, her business was the snaring and
selling of animals, including unicorns. Stile had traded
magical favors with Yellow in the past and had come to
respect her, but he could understand why his wife and
steed preferred not to socialize.

"Anything for thee," he agreed. "However, night ap-
proaches and the White Mountains lie beyond."

"Indulge thyself in a spell. Adept."

"How soon the honeymoon turns to dull marriage," he
grumbled. Clip made a musical snort of mirth, and the
lady smiled.

The ramshackle premises of Yellow appeared. Both an-
imals sniffed the air and veered toward the enclosure.
Hastily Stile sang a counterspell: "This will cure the
witch's lure." That enabled them to ignore the hypnotic
vapor that drew animals in to capture and confinement.
Before long they had skirted those premises and moved
well on toward the termination of the plain to the north.

At dusk they came to the White Mountain range. Here
the peaks rose straight out of the plain in defiance of
normal geological principles; probably magic had been in-
volved in their formation.

The curtain blithely traveled up the slope at a steep
angle. It would have been difficult to navigate this route by
daylight; at night the attempt would be foolhardy. "And
there are snow-demons," the Lady said as an afterthought.

Stile pondered, then conjured a floating ski lift. It con-
tained a heated stall for two equines, complete with a
trough filled with fine grain, and a projecting shelf with
several mugs of nutri-cocoa similar to what was available
from a Proton food machine. Clip could have converted to

50

juxtaposition

hawk-form and flown up, but the cold would have hin-
dered him, and this was far more comfortable. Unicorn and
horse stepped into the stalls and began feeding, while Stile
and the Lady mounted for their repast. Eating and sleep-
ing while mounted was no novelty; it was part of the joy
of Phaze.

They rode serenely upward as if drawn by an invisible
cable. "Yet I wonder where this magic power comes from?"
Stile mused. "I realize that the mineral Phazite is the
power source for magic, just as its other-frame self, Fro-
tonite, is the basis for that scientific, energy-processing
society. But why should certain people, such as the Adepts,
channel that power better than others? Why should
music and doggerel verse implement it for me, while the
Green Adept needs special gestures and the White Adept
needs mystic symbols? There is a certain channelization
here that can not be coincidental. But if it is natural, what
governs it? If it is artificial, who set it up?"

"Thou wert ever questioning the natural order," the
Lady Blue said affectionately. "Asking whence came the
Proton objects conjured to this frame, like the harmonica,
and whether they were turning up missing from that frame,
making us thieves."

So his other self had speculated similarly! "I wonder if I
could conjure a source of information? Maybe a smart
demon, like the one Yellow animates with a potion."

"Conjure not demons, lest they turn on thee," she
warned, and Clip gave an affirmative blast on his horn.

"Yes, I suppose there are no shortcuts," Stile said. "But
one way or another, I hope to find the answer."

"Mayhap that is why mischief lurks for thee at the West
Pole," the Lady said, not facetiously. "Thou canst not let
things rest, any more in this self than in thine other."

That was quite possible, he thought. It was likely to be
the curious child with a screwdriver who poked into a
power outlet and got zapped, while the passive child es-
caped harm. But man was a carious creature, and that
insatiable appetite for knowledge had led him to civiliza-
tion and the stars. Progress had its dangers, yet was neces-
sary—

Something rattled against the side of the gondola stall,

r

juxtaposition

51

startling them. Clip shifted instantly to hawk-form, drop-
ping Stile so suddenly to the floor that he stumbled face-
first into the food trough as if piggishly hungry. Hinblue
eyed him as he lifted his corn- and barley-covered face,
and made a snort that sounded suspiciously like a snicker.
"Et tu. Brute," Stile muttered, wiping off his face while the
Lady tittered.

Soon Clip returned from his survey of the exterior situa-
tion, metamorphosing to man-form. "Snow-demons," he
said. "Throwing icicles at us."

Stile made a modification spell, and the chamber drew
farther out from the mountainside, beyond reach of icicles.
So much for that. "Yet this will complicate our night's
lodging," Stile commented.

"Nay, I know a snow-chief," the Lady said. "Once the
demons were enemies of my Lord Blue, but we have
healed many, and this one will host us graciously enough,
methinks."

"Mayhap," Stile said dubiously. "But I shall set a warn-
ing spell against betrayal."

"Do thou that," she agreed. "One can never be quite
certain with demons."

They crested the high peak and followed the curtain to
an icebound hollow in a pass on the north side. "Here,
belike, can we find my friend," the Lady said.

Stile placed the warning spell, and another to keep
warm—a wamer and a warmer, as the Lady put it—and
they rode out. There was a cave in the ice, descending into
the mountain. They approached this, and the snow demons
appeared.

"I seek Freezetooth," the Lady proclaimed. "Him have I
befriended." And in an amazingly short time, they were in
the cold hall of the snow-chief.

Freezetooth was largely made of snow and ice. His skin
was translucent, and his hair and beard were massed, tiny
icicles. Freezing fog wafted out of his mouth as he spoke.
But he was affable enough. Unlike most of his kind, he
could talk. It seemed that most demons did not regard the
human tongue as important enough to master, but a chief
had to handle affairs of state and interrogate prisoners.
"Welcome, warm ones," he said with a trace of delicately

52 juxtaposition

suppressed aversion. "What favor do you offer for the
privilege of nighting at my glorious palace?"

Glorious palace? Stile glanced about the drear, ice-
shrouded cave. It was literally freezing here—otherwise
the snow-demons would melt. Even protected by his spell,
Stile felt cold.

'I have done thy people many favors in past years," the
Lady reminded Freezetooth indignantly, small sparks
flashing from her eyes. That was a trick of hers Stile
always admired, but several snow-demons drew hastily
back in alarm.

"Aye, and in appreciation, we consume thee not," the
chief agreed. "What hast thou done far us lately, thou and
thy cohorts?"

"This cohort is the Blue Adept," she said, indicating
Stile.

There was a ripple through the cave, as of ice cracking
under stress. Freezetooth squinted, his snowy brow crust-
ing up in reflection. "I do recall something about a white
foal—"

Stile placed (he allusion. His alternate self, the former
Blue Adept, had helped the Lady Blue rescue her white
foal from the snow-demons, who did not now realize that
the identity of the Blue Adept had changed. It hardly
mattered, really.

"That foal would have died with thy people, being no
snow-mare, though she looked it. But there was an ava-
lanche—"

"An accident," Freezetooth said quickly.

"An accident," Stile agreed, though they both knew bet-
ter. The demons had tried to kill the Blue Adept—and had
received a harsh lesson. Surely they did not want another.
But there was no need to antagonize them. "What favor
didst thou crave?"

Now there was a canny glint in the demon's frozen eye.
'"Come converse privately. Adept, male to male."

In a private chamber the demon confessed his desire: he
loved a lovely, flowing, brilliantly hued fire-spirit. His
"flame" was literally a flame.

The problem was immediately apparent. Freezetooth
could not approach his love without melting. If she cooled

r

Juxtaposition                      53

to his temperature, her fire would extinguish and she
would perish. Forbidden fruit, indeed!

Fortunately the remedy was within the means of Adept
magic. Stile generated a spell to render Freezetooth invul-
nerable to heat. The flames would feel as deliciously cold
as they were in fact hot.

The demon chief departed hastily to rendezvous with his
love. Stile and his party were treated well by the remaining
demons, who were no longer chilled by the wintry glare of
their lord. The finest snowbanks were provided for sleep-
ing on, in the most frigid and windy of the chambers.
Without Stile's warmth-spell, it would have been disaster.
As it was, they started to melt down into the snow, and
Stile had to modify his spell to prevent that. Once every-
thing had been adjusted, the facilities were quite comfort-
able.

In the morning Freezetooth was back, and his icicles
positively scintillated. No need to ask how his evening had
worked out! He insisted that his close friend the Adept
stay for a proper feast that evening.

It occurred to Stile that this hospitality could be useful.
"Do thou remain here while I perform a necessary chore
in Proton," he told the Lady. "I must attend the final
Round of the Tourney, but should be back by noon."

"I know, my love. Is it selfish of me to hope that thou
dost lose that Game and find thyself confined to Phaze?"

He kissed her. "Yes, it is selfish. Sheen depends on
me."

"Ah, yes—I forget the Lady Sheen. Methinks I shall
consider her options whilst thou art gone."

Stile wasn't certain what that would lead to. The Lady
Blue could cross the curtain, but Sheen could not function
in Phaze. "Until noon," Stile said, then spelled himself to
his usual curtain crossing.

CHAPTER 4

Poem

Stile's opponent for the finals was a serf woman two years
younger than he: Rue, a twenty-year-tenure veteran of the
Game. Like himself, she had not qualified at the top of her
age ladder; but also like himself, she was the best of her
decade. She was one of the half-dozen serf players Stile
was not eager to meet in the Tourney. He thought he
could beat her, but he wasn't sure.

Rue had luck as well as skill, for she had lost no Rounds.
That meant that a single victory for her would bring her
the prize, while one for Stile would merely bring him even.
To beat Rue twice in succession—that would be difficult.

They played the grid. Stile got the letters. Rue was good
at all manner of tool and machine games, being in superb
health; he was well skilled in these areas, too, and could
take her in most tool games, but would be at a disadvan-
tage in machine-assisted games. She would expect him to
go for TOOL or ANIMAL, so instead he went for A.
NAKED. If she went for 4. ARTS, as he expected, this
would foul her up.

But she had done the unexpected too, going for 3.
CHANCE. With two chances to his one, the advantage
would be with her on the straight gamble—if that was the
way she wanted to play it. As evidently she did.

They played the subgrid, and finished with a very simple
guessing game; each had to pick a number, and if the total
of the two numbers was even. Stile won. Even, in this
coding, was male; odd was female. This game was so
simple it would be played on the grid. Each would enter
his/her number, the total flashing on both screens only
when both were entered.

54

r

Juxtaposition                      55

Would she choose her own code, an odd number? People
tended to, unconsciously, feeling more at home with their
own. If she chose odd and he chose even, she would win.

Obviously he should choose odd, to cancel her odd. But,
as obviously, she would anticipate that and choose even.
Then the result would be. odd, and she would still win. It
seemed she stood to win regardless.

It came back to the subjective. Given no advantage
between alternatives, a person normally selected what
pleased him emotionally. Rue, in doubt, should go for
odd. Therefore Stile overruled his preference for even and
chose the number of letters in his name: five. He entered
this on the grid and locked it; no way to change his mind
now»

Rue had not yet made up her mind. Now the onus was
hers, and they both knew it, and the broadcast audience
knew it. She could win or lose by her decision; Stile was
passive. The pressure was on her.

"Ten seconds until forfeit," the voice of the Game
Computer announced.

Rue grimaced and punched in her number. She was
pretty enough, with auburn hair, an extremely fit body,
and only a few age creases forming on face and neck. She
was thirty-three years old, her youth waning. If she won
this one, she would be eligible for rejuvenation, and Stile
suspected she desired that more than the actual wealth of
Citizenship.

The total showed eight. Rue had chosen the letters of
her own name. Even—and Stile had won.

Stile kept his face impassive. He had been lucky—but
was keenly aware of the fickleness of that mistress. Rue
blanched a little, but knew her chances remained even.
Now they were tied, with thirteen victories and one loss
each.

There was no break between Rounds this time, since
there were no complexities about scheduling. They played
the grid again immediately.

This time Stile got the numbers. He certainly was not
going for CHANCE, though it had just salvaged his drive.
It had not won him anything beyond that, for as a finalist

56 Juxtaposition

he had already achieved the prize of life tenure as a serf.
The only real step forward he could make was to Citizen-
ship, and now at last it was within his means. One single
win—

He selected 4. ARTS, knowing that she would be play-
ing to avoid his strong points elsewhere. The arts cut
across other skills, and Rue was noted for her intellectual
velocity and proEciency with machine-assisted games. Ma-
chine art would be a tossup, but he was willing to fight it
out there.

But she surprised him again, choosing A. NAKED. So
it was 1A, Naked Arts. Stile did not like this; he had had a
very bad time in this box in his critical match with the Red
Adept, and had pulled it out only by means of a despera-
tion ploy.

They played the subgrids, and finished, to his abrupt
delight, with EXTEMPORANEOUS POETRY. Stile had
always fancied himself a poet; he had a ready flair for
rhyme and meter that had served him in excellent stead in
Phaze. But true poetry was more than this—and now he
would be able to do something significant when and where
it counted.

The Game Computer printed a random list of a dozen
words. "Thirty minutes to incorporate these terms into
poems," it announced. "Highest point scores given for the
use of one key word per line, in order, in the terminal
position, rhymed. Technical facility fifty percent; content
fifty percent. A panel of judges, including one male Citizen,
one female Citizen, male serf, female serf, and the Game
Computer, will decide the rating of each effort on the basis
of zero to one hundred. The higher composite score pre-
vails. Proceed."

This was more restrictive than Stile liked, but he re-
mained well satisfied. It was not that he thought he had an
easy victory, he knew that Rue, too, had facility with
words, perhaps greater than his own. She was an ex-
tremely quick-witted woman—which was of course one
reason she had made it to the Tourney finals. She could
cobble together a poem as readily as he could. But at least
this particular contest would be decided on skill, not luck.

juxtaposition                      S7

This was a fair encounter. If he won or if he lost, it would
be because he had established his level. That was all he
could ask.

Stile considered the words. They were: BITCH, CUBE,
FLAME, SIR, SILENCE, LOVE, HORN, CHEAT,
ROACH, CIVIL, FLUTE, EARTH. An anomalous bunch
indeed! None of them rhymed with each other, so there
were no free rides there. The only way to get a key term at
the end of a rhyming line was to alternate with filler lines.
"My female dog is a wonderful bitch; whenever she
scratches she has an itch." That sort of thing would hardly
win the Tourney; it was literal doggerel. It might be better
to alternate terminal key words with mid-line key words,
sacrificing the preferred terminal spot for the sake of the
also-preferred, one-key-word-per-line arrangement. The
Computer had not made it easy; the contestants had to
choose between sacrifices. "My female dog is a wonderful
bitch; she stands on a cube and does a twitch." That
would gamer a better technical score, but nothing extra on
content.

He glanced at Rue. She was frowning, evidently dis-
pleased by the first term. Stile half smiled; he would have
been similarly put out if the term had been RUNT. He
was a runt and she was a bitch—but that was the kind of
mischief random selection could do.

Because this was Naked Arts, they could use no imple-
ments, make no written notes. No rhyming dictionaries.
They had to do it all in their heads, punching only the
finished poems into the grid for judgment. If either had
trouble with memory, he or she could place individual
lines as they were worked out. But then those lines would
be final, no changes allowed. Since both Stile and Rue
were experienced Game players, both could hold the de-
veloping poems in memory until the time for presentation.
No, the only problem was wrestling these awkward words
into the most artistic and meaningful whole.

Stile wrestled a while, but was not satisfied. He could
make rhymes and meter, certainly—but where was the
meaning? One ignored the content portion of the poem at
one's peril. Yet it seemed impossible to fit these unruly

58 juxtaposition

words into anything serious; the problem of rhyming and
positioning turned his efforts to frivolous tangents, as with
the antics of his female dog. What could a person do
seriously with words like bitch, cube, and flame?

Time was passing. Rue was hard at work; her expression
and concentration suggested she had developed a strategy
of creation and was happily ironing out the wrinkles. She
would probably come up with something very clever. He
had to come up with something even more clever—or
more significant. Sir, silence, love—what a headachel

He brought himself back to basics. There were really
two types of poetry: the ornamental and the consequen-
tial. Ornaments were rhyme, meter, alliteration, pattern,
humor, assonance, and technical cleverness. They were
stressed in light verse, parody, the libretto for popular
music, and such. Serious poetry de-emphasized such things,
or dispensed with them altogether. Thus some people
were unable even to recognize serious poetry, because it
didn't necessarily rhyme. But ultimately any poetic appeal
was to the deeper emotions, and the use of symbolism
enabled it to evoke complex ramifications in the most
compact presentation. As with Kipling's Recessional: "Far-
called, our navies melt away; On dune and headland sinks
the fire: Lo, all our pomp of yesterday Is one with Nine-
veh and Tyre!" Presented to Queen Victoria some cen-
turies back, this poem did not find instant favor, for it
signaled the decline of the Earth-wide British Empire. But
what imagery was evoked by the names of those two an-
cient cities, foremost in their times, finally brought to ruin
by the armies of Babylonia and Alexander the Great,
drunkard though the latter might have been. Kipling's
verse was superficially pretty; it rhymed nicely. But its real
impact was its content, the somber warning for an over-
extended empire. All too soon it had been London-town
under the siege of weapons unknown in the time of Tyre,
as the Germans sent their bombers and rockets over. How
weU Kipling had understood!

With that memory. Stile saw his way. Rhyme, meter,
and the rest of the prettiness were encumbrances; he had
to dispense with them all and concentrate on meaning and
emotion. He would lose some technical points, but gain

r

Juxtaposition                      59

where it counted. Win or lose, he would do his best, his
way.

Stile considered the first word—bitch. He knew of a
noble bitch—the old female werewolf who had guided
Clef to the Platinum Demesnes, sacrificing her life in the
process. Stile could do worse than remember her in this
poeml

Cube—there was one cube that was fresh in his experi-
ence, and that was the doubling cube of his recent back-
gammon game, which had enabled him to pull out a last-
moment win.

Flame—well, it wasn't the most serious thing, but he
had just enabled the chief snow-demon to have a liaison
with his literal flame. That might not have any meaning to
the Tourney judges, but this poem was not really for them
but for Stile himself—his evocation of himself. The frame
of Phaze was vitally important to him, and the flame re-
lated to that and to the notion of romance, which brought
him to the Lady Blue. Ah, yes.

Sir—that was easy. This very poem was Stile's final
effort to be called sir: to become a Citizen of Proton, and
have similar stature and power in Proton as he did in
Phaze as the Blue Adept.

But the remaining terms—they did not seem to relate.
Now he was emotionally committed to this course, and
had to use them in it—which meant he would have to
improvise. That would be troublesome.

What was there to do except use the words as keys,
perhaps as some psychic revelation that had to be clothed
with syntax to become meaningful? If the first four terms
brought him from the recent past to the present, the next
eight might be taken as signals of the future. At least he
would assume as much for the sake of the poem—insights
to himself, now and to come. If the insights proved false,-
then this was a work of fiction; if true, of prediction. It
was a worthy game, and he would take it seriously.

Stile bent to it with a will, and the lines fell into their
places. No rhyme, no meter, no other ornamentation; just
a series of statements like those of the Oracle, clarifying
the significance of each key term. He found that there was
not a great amount of mystery to it; the statements were

60 Juxtaposition

mostly common sense, modiEed by what he already knew,
and the whole was an affirmation of man's resignation to
fate.

Suddenly time was up. Rue and Stile typed in their
poems. Now it was up to the panel of judges.

In the interim, those judges had assembled. Each one
sat in a separate booth facing a central holograph. They
could view the holo and converse with each other at the
same time. The Game Computer was represented by a
booth containing a humanoid robot, its outer surface trans-
parent, so that its wires, hydraulics, and electronic com-
ponents showed. The thing was at Erst eerie, like an ani-
mated cross section of the human body, but soon the eye
accepted it for what it was: an animation of a simplified
representation of the far more complicated Computer.

"Display one poem," the Computer-figure said. "The
serf Rue will commence her reading."

Rue looked at the printed poem in her grid screen and
began to read. A holograph of her formed above the cen-
tral table, where all the judges could see it plainly. It
looked as if she were standing there, a woman on a pedes-
tal, and her eyes made contact with those of whatever
judge she happened to face.

"My poem is entitled Cruel Lover," she announced.
Then she read, flouncing prettily and smiling or frowning
to emphasize the meaning appropriately. As she read each
line, it appeared on a simulated screen over her head, until
the full poem was printed.

Call me witch or call me bitch
Call me square or cube
By any name I'm still the flame
Burning on the tube.

I'll take no slur, I tell you, sir
I will not sit in silence
I'll take your glove in lieu of love
But will accept no violence.

Now light's reborn by dawn's bright horn
You can no longer cheat

r

juxtaposition                      61

Accept reproach or be a roach
Or make my joy complete.

Desist this drivel and be civil
Play violin or flute

Be up with mirth or down to earth
But keep love absolute.

"The key words are used correctly and in the proper
sequence," the Computer said. "Each one terminates its
lines, and each is matched with a rhyme of good quality.
These are credits. Four lines exist only to complete the
necessary rhymes; these are neutral. The metric scansion is
correct and consistent—basically iambic tetrameter alter-
nating with iambic trimeter with certain convenient modifi-
cations in the extreme feet. This is a common mode and
not considered difficult. I rate the technical facility of this
effort forty-two of a total of fifty points alloted to this
aspect. Proceed to my left with your judgments."

The female serf was to the left. "I don't know much
about all those things," she said diffidently. "But it rhymes,
and I sort of like it. So I give it a forty-five."

There was the illiterate response. Stile thought. That
was the vote he had not deigned to court, though it cost
him Citizenship.

Next was the male Citizen, resplendent in his ornate
robes. "We are not yet discussing content or interpreta-
tion?" he inquired. When the Computer agreed, he contin-
ued: "I find the format simplistic but effective. I'll give it
forty." Stile liked that reaction better.

Then the male serf voted. "I don't relate well to the
female tone, but technically it seems all right for what it
is. The key words are all in the right place, and they do fit
in more neatly than I could do. Forty-three from me."

The female Citizen, in a sequined suit, fire opals gleam-
ing at her ears, voted last. "Some of the lines are forced or
confusing, but I suppose I must grade that in content.
She's done an excellent job of stringing the random words
coherently together. Forty-six."

Stile saw that the average score was forty-three, which
was good—probably a good deal better than his own

62                      Juxtaposition

would be. Rue had certainly integrated her terms cleverly.
He was going to have a rough time of this one!

"We shall now analyze the second poem for technical
merit," the Computer said.

Stile stepped up to the grid. He found himself looking
past his printed poem into the glassy orbs of the Computer
simulacrum robot. He glanced to the side and saw the
male serf. He could see anyone he chose, merely by look-
ing in the correct direction; their circle was laid out flat on
bis screen.

"My poem is titled Insights," he said. Then he read:

Nobility is found in a werewolf bitch
Defeat converts to victory by an ivory cube
Magic makes ice merge with flame
A Game converts serf to sir.

The mischief of the future is shrouded in silence
And part of that mischief is love
We must heed the summons of Gabriel's horn
Destiny the single thing we can not cheat.

All are subject: the dragon and the roach
Since we are bound, we must be civil
Our fate is determined by God's flute
That tumbles mountains and shakes the earth.

He had made eye contact with each judge in turn as he
read, and had seen their responses. Unfortunately, these
were not promising; some frowned, some seemed con-
fused. It wasn't going over; they did not understand its
form or content.

"This is free verse," the Computer said. "It has no con-
sistent meter and no rhyme. This should not be taken as a
defect. The key terms are terminally placed, in correct
order, one to a line with no waste lines. There are natural
pauses at the end of most lines. As free verse, I rate this
technically at thirty-nine."

Stile's heart sank. The others would follow the Com-
puter's lead, and he would average several points below
Rue's effort.

Juxtaposition                      63

He was not disappointed in this expectation. The serf
woman wondered whether these lines could even be con-
sidered poetry, as they seemed just like sentences to her,
and the others were lukewarm. The average score was
thirty-eight. Stile was five points behind.

Now it was time for the content analysis. Neither poet
was permitted to speak at this stage; it was felt that if the
poems did not speak for themselves, they were defective.
"This is a straightforward statement of position," the
Computer said of Rue's effort. "She evidently feels slighted
by her male friend, and is dictating to him the terms of
their future association. I perceive no particular meaning
beyond this, and therefore do not regard this as other than
light verse. Rating thirty-five."

That was a good sign. Stile thought. If the others fol-
lowed this lead, her average would drop.

"It's a good thing machines aren't in charge of ro-
mance," the serf woman remarked. "I find this a good
telling-off. The guy is a roach, calling her such names, and
I'm all with her. I say fifty."

Stile winced inwardly. He needed to recover five points,
and figured they might rate his poem an average 40. The
Computer's lead had put him right in line to even it up by
dropping Rue's score, but this 50 was a disaster.

The male Citizen was more critical, however. "I cer-
tainly don't care to see a woman spelling out her terms like
that for a romance, though I suppose, if she can find a
man to accept them, it's their business. I don't follow this
'burning on the tube' reference; does it make sense at
all?"

"Oh, sure, sir," the male serf said. "In the old days on
Earth they had gas burners, gas coming up a tube and the
flame on top. So she's likening herself to that sort of flame.
It's a sort of pun, really."

The Citizen shrugged. "Clever," he said sourly. "I rate
this thirty." Stile saw Rue wince. But he himself, while
deploring the man's narrowness, was gratified by the score.
It put him back in the running.

The male serf was next. "If she becomes a Citizen, then
she can set terms," he said, and the others laughed. They
were getting into this now, loosening up. "I guess I'm

64 Juxtaposition

looking for something deeper than this, some social com-
mentary, not just female demands. Rating thirty-two."
And Stile's hopes elevated another notch. Now if only the
other woman did not react by sexual alignment—

"I believe I note an extremely clever thrust," the lady
Citizen said. "Nowhere is the protagonist identified; it is
not necessarily serf Rue at all. It could be any woman,
most especially one who has been wronged by the man she
loves. It could even apply to a humanoid robot female
who loves a flesh-man."

Oh, nol Had Rue slanted her verse to pillory Stile? He
saw the judges turning to look at him, and at Sheen in the
small physical audience permitted. They knew)

"The references to square and cube fall into place," the
lady Citizen continued. "A robot is a creature of geometri-
cal parts, supposedly, animated by electric power from a
tiny furnace fed by Protonite. She is certainly burning,
intemaUyI She must accept a man's attentions—I under-
stand that is what that type is primarily designed for—but
can not have his love, since he knows she is a machine.
Yet she can be programmed for emotion; she loves him,
knowing that love is not returned. Perhaps the man she
serves is a musician, playing the violin or flute—"

Sheen got up from her seat in the audience and walked
toward the exit. Stile felt acute pity for her. She was not
supposed to be the targetl

"One moment," the male Citizen said. "That's her, isn't
it? I want to question her."

"That would be involving her in the panel's delibera-
tion," the female Citizen said. "I doubt that's legitimate."

"The judges may seek any source of information they
wish," the Computer said. "Except the author of the piece
in question."

"Female robot—how do you feel about this poem?" the
male Citizen called.

Sheen stopped and faced him. "Sir, I prefer not to an-
swer, if I am to be considered an interested party."

"Answeri" he directed, with supreme indifference to her
feelings.

"You may answer," the Computer said. "You have not
volunteered your influence; you have been summoned by

r

Juxtaposition                      65

this panel as a material witness. We are trying to deter-
mine whether there is substance to the hypothesis that the
poem in question represents your viewpoint."

Sheen's mouth finned. Her human mannerisms had be-
come so facile that in no physical way was her machine
nature evident. She was a beautiful woman, naked of body
and perhaps of mind. "Then you shall have my viewpoint,
sir. If the poem concerns me, it is not intended as a com-
pliment. It is intended as an attack on the man I love,
using me as an involuntary weapon. I am a machine—but
I think that even were I alive, I would not care so cyni-
cally to hurt a living person in this fashion. This poem is
crueler than anything the man I love might do. I am sure
his own poem is not of this nature."

The Citizen nodded. "That's some machine," he mur-
mured.

The female Citizen considered, pursing her lips. Her
opals flashed. "I am left with a choice. Either this poem is
not directed at, shall we say, real people, in which case it
is not remarkable—or it is so directed, in which case its
brilliance is nullified by its cruelty. In either case, I can
not respect it. I rate it twenty-five."

That was disaster for Rue. It made her average score
34V2. The other panelists could reconsider their votes if
they wished, but seemed content to let them stand. Rue's
poem had a cumulative score of 77'Vz. Stile had a fair
chance to beat that, thanks to Sheen. All he needed was
forty points.

Now the judges considered Stile's effort for content.
"This poem is more serious and obscure than the other,"
the Computer said. "Some may not be aware that there
exists an alternate frame of reality of this planet within
which other laws of physics govern. The author is able to
enter that frame, where he is a person of power and has an
elegant wife. Several of the first six lines evidently refer to
that frame. There was a female wolf who sacrificed her life
for her duty, and a magical encounter between a creature
of ice and another of fire. The future in that frame can
occasionally be foreseen by magical means, and it contains
extraordinary mischief, part of which is the conflict of
love loyalties. Two lines refer to the Tourney now being

66

juxtaposition

juxtaposition

67

concluded, which will lead to Citizenship for one of these
serfs. Thus the first portion of the poem is relevant to the
larger situation here and must be accorded credit. The
second portion appears to be an advisory essay. The Angel
Gabriel is destined myfhologically to blow his trumpet on
Judgment Day for living persons—and that call is the one
no one can evade or cheat. This poem extends this concept
to creatures both fanciful and repulsive. It concludes that
these people and creatures must accept the inevitable with
civility, and reminds us that, according to the legend of
the other frame, the powerful flute—perhaps an alternate
designation of Gabriel's horn—has already announced it-
self by shaking the earth, in the form of the tremors re-
cently experienced here. Allowing for a considerable fig-
urative element, I find this poem serious and valid. The
tremors were actually caused by the collapse of over-
worked Protonite mines in the southern range, but this can
be taken as a warning: the mineral on which this planet's
power is literally based is not inexhaustible, and we shall
suffer an accounting when that mineral is at last depleted.
Already we have suffered a not-inconsequential damage to
a number of our facilities. I therefore take this poem as a
well-conceived and serious warning, and on that basis I
rate it forty-eight."

Stile was amazed and gratified. He had had no hint the
Game Computer knew so much about him or the frame of
Phaze, or that it could interpret oblique references with
such dispatch. Now he realized that everything he had told
Sheen, she had relayed to her machine friends. They in
turn could have informed the Game Computer, who per-
haps was one of their number. Certainly it possessed con-
siderable self-will, backed by the phenomenal resources of
the Computer memory banks and the experience of ana-
lyzing many thousands of Games. So this should not have
surprised him at all.

It was the serf woman's turn to vote. "Is there any
cutting at the opponent?" she asked. The other heads indi-
cated that no one perceived any. "I'm not sure about all
the business of the other frame; this is the first I've heard
of it. But I can believe the Protonite won't last forever,

and somehow this serf-Citizen setup must be called to
account. So okay, I'll go with the warning. I rate it forty."

This was better than Stile had hoped from her. She had
given the other poem 50, and he had feared she was a man-
hater.

"Good job," the male Citizen said. "Forty-five."

"Just what kind of a person is he in that frame you
talk about?" the serf man asked,

"He is what is called an Adept," the Computer an-
swered. "That means he is a powerful magician."

"Funny to hear a computer say that," the man said. "But
I sort of go for that fantasy bit, even if it is all a story.
Forty-two."

Stile's hope was sailing. These were amazingly favorable
responses. He was averaging 44. It would take a rating of
25 by the last panelist to bring him down to par with Rue.
The lady Citizen seemed too perceptive for that—but she
had surprised him before. He felt his hands getting sweaty
as he waited for her answer.

"This mischief of love," she said. "Is this person con-
cerned about the feelings of the lady robot who loves
him?"

"He may not answer," the Computer reminded her. "We
must divine that answer from his poem."

"I wonder whether in fact it is his own personal reckon-
ing he is most concerned with," she said. "He says they
must be civil, because what will be, will be. I am not sure I
can accept that answer."

Stile quailed. This woman had downgraded Rue's verse
for cruelty; was she about to do the same for his?

"Since he has a wife in the other frame, he really does
not need a woman of any kind in this frame," she contin-
ued. "It is unfair to keep her in doubt."

"We may approve or disapprove the poet's personal life,"
the male Citizen said. "But we are here to judge only the
merit of the poem. For what it's worth, I see several indi-
cations that he recognizes the possibility of fundamental
change. A bitch turns noble, defeat becomes victory, ice
merges with flame, serf becomes Citizen, the fate of drag-
ons and roaches is linked. Perhaps he is preparing his




68                      Juxtaposition

philosophy for the recognition that a living creature may
merge with a machine. If this is the way fate decrees, he
will accept it."

She nodded. "Yes, the implication is there. The author
of this poem, I think, is unlikely to be deliberately cruel.
He is in a difficult situation, he is bound, he is civil. It is
an example more of us might follow. I rate this work forty-
four."

Stile's knees almost gave way. She had not torpedoed
him; his total score would be 82, comfortably ahead of
Rue's total.

"Do any wish to change their votes on either aspect of
either poem?" the Computer inquired. "Your votes are not
binding until confirmed."

The panelists exchanged glances. Stile got tense again. It
could still come apart!

"Yes, I do," the serf woman said. Stile saw Rue tense;

this was the one who had given her 50 on content. If she
revised her grade on Stile's poem downward—

"I believe I overreacted on that fifty score," she said.
"Let's call it forty-five for Cruel Lover."

Again Stile's knees turned to goo. She had come down
on his side!

"Final score eighty-two to seventy-seven in favor of
Stile's poem," the Computer said after a pause. "He is the
winner of this Tourney."

Now there was applause from the hidden public address
system. So quickly, so simply, he had won!

But he saw Rue, standing isolated, eyes downcast. On
impulse he went to her. "It was a good game," he said.
"You could easily have won it."

"I still have life tenure," she said, half choked with
disappointment. Then, as an afterthought, she added:

"Sir."

Stile felt awkward. "If you ever need a favor—"

"I did not direct my poem at you. Not consciously. I
was thinking of someone who threw me over. Sir."

But now the crowd was closing in, and Stile's attention
was necessarily diverted. "By the authority vested in me by
the Council of Citizens of Planet Proton," the Game
Computer said, its voice emerging from every speaker

luxtaposition                      69

under its control throughout the Game Annex, "I now
declare that the serf Stile, having won the Tourney, is
acquitted of serf status and endowed with Citizenship and
all appurtenances and privileges pertaining thereto, from
this instant forward."

The applause swelled massively. The panelists joined in,
serfs and Citizens alike.

A robot hastened forward with an ornate robe. "Sir, I
belong to your transition estate. It is your privilege to
wear any apparel or none. Yet to avoid confusion—"

Stile had thought he was braced for this, but the re-
peated appellation "sir" startled him. For a lifetime he had
called others sir; now he had comprehensive conditioning
to unlearn. "Thank you," he said, leaching for the robe.

The robot skittered to the side. "Allow me, sir," it said,
and Stile realized it wanted to put the robe on him. It did
not behoove a Citizen to serve himself, though he could if
he wanted to. Stile suffered himself to be dressed, holding
a mental picture of a horse being saddled. "Thank, you," he
repeated awkwardly.

The machine moved dose, getting the robe on and ad-
justed. "A Citizen need not thank a machine—or anyone,"
it murmured discreetly in Stile's ear.

"Oh. Yes. Thank—uh, yes."

"Quite all right, sir," the machine said smoothly.

Now a lady Citizen approached. It was Stile's employer.
Former employer, he reminded himself. "I am gratified,
Stile," she said. "You have made me a winner too."

"Thank you, sir." Then Stile bit his tongue.

She smiled. "Thank you, sir." And she leaned forward
to kiss him on the right eyebrow. "I profited a fantastic
amount on your success. But more than that is the satis-
faction of sponsoring a Tourney winner. You will find me
appreciative." She walked away.

Now the Citizen known as the Rifleman approached. "I
know exactly how you feel," he said. That was no exag-
geration; the Rifleman had won his own Tourney fifteen
years before. Stile had encountered him in the first Round
of this Tourney and barely pulled out the victory. The
Rifleman had been an excellent loser. "Accept some pri-
vate advice. Citizen: get away from the public for several




T

70

Juxtaposition

juxtaposition

71

days and drill yourself in the new reality. That will cure
you of embarrassing slips. And get yourself someone to
explain the ropes in nontechnical terms—the extent of
your vested estate, the figures, the prerogatives. There's a
hell of a lot to learn fast, if you don't want to be vic-
timized by predatory Citizens."

"But aren't all Citizens—that is, don't they respect the
estates of other Citizens?"

"Your minimum share of the Protonite harvest can not
be impinged upon—but only your luck and competence
and determination can establish your place in the Citizen
heirarchy. This is a new game. Stile—oh, yes. Citizens
have names; we are merely anonymous to the serfs. You
may wish to select a new name for yourself—"

"No need."

"It is a game more intricate and far-reaching than any
within the Tourney. Make a point to master its nuances,
Stile—soon." And the Rifleman gave him a meaningful
glance.

The audience was dissipating as the novelty of the new
Citizen wore off. Stile signaled Sheen. "Can your friends
provide me with a mentor conversant with the nuances of
Citizen behavior?"

"They can, sir," she said. "Or they could program me—"

"Excellent! Get yourself programmed. They'll know
what I need. And do it soon."

Sheen left. Stile found it incongruous that she should
remain naked while he was now clothed. Yet of course she
remained a serf—an imitation serf—now in his employ;

she would remain naked the rest of her life.

Her life? Stile smiled, a trifle grimly. He was forgetting
that she had no life. Yet she was his best friend in this
frame.

Stile turned to the robot who had brought his robe.
"Take me to my estate," he ordered it.

The machine hesitated. "Sir, you have none."

"None? But I thought all Citizens—"

"Each Citizen has a standard share of the Protonite
mines. All else follows."

"I see." It seemed there was much that was not handed

to a Citizen on a platter. He needed that manual of Citi-
zenship! Where was Sheen? Her programming should have
been quick.

Then she appeared. "I have it, sir," she said.

"Excellent. Take me to an appropriate and private
place, and deliver."

"Don't I always—sir?" She led the way out of the Game
Annex.

The place turned out to be a temporary roinidome set
up on the desert. Its generator tapped an underground
power cable, so as to form the force field that prevented
the thin, polluted outside atmosphere from penetrating. A
portable unit filled the dome with pleasant, properly
cooled air. Sheen set up a table for two, put out crackers,
cheese, and mock wine, adjusted the field to turn opaque,
and planted a spy-disrupter device on the ground. "Now
we are private, sir," she said.

"You don't have to say sir to me," he protested.

"Yes, I do, sir. You are a Citizen and I am a naked serf.
We violate this convention at our peril."

"But you've been my friend all along!"

"And once more than that, sir," she reminded him. She
had come to him as guardian and mistress, and had been
good in both capacities. His marriage to the Lady Blue had
deleted the second. Sheen, a machine supposedly without
any human emotion not programmed into her, had tried to
commit suicide—self-destruction. She had become recon-
ciled after meeting the Lady Blue. Sheen still loved him,
and for that Stile felt guilty.

"It occurs to me that, as a Citizen, I could have you
reprogrammed to have no personal feeling toward me,"
he said.

"This is true, sir."

"Do you wish it?"

"No, sir."

"Sheen, I value you greatly. I do not want you to suffer.
That poem of Rue's—I am absolutely opposed to giving
you cause to feel that way. Is there anything within my
present power I can do to make you happy?"

"There is, sir. But you would not."




72                      juxtaposition

She was uncompromising. She wanted his love again,
physically if not emotionally, and that he could not give.
"Aside from that."

"Nothing, sir."

"But I may be able to make your friends happy. As
Citizen, I can facilitate their recognition as sapient en-
tities." Her friends were the self-willed machines of Proton
who, like Sheen herself, had helped him survive Citizen
displeasure in the past. He had sworn never to act against
their interests so long as they did not act against the inter-
ests of man, and both parties honored that oath. Stile did
not regard their desire to achieve serf status as contrary to
the oath; he agreed they should have it. But such status
was not easy to achieve; the Citizens were devoted to the
status quo,

"All in good time, sir. Now shall we review the appur-
tenances and privileges of Citizenship?"

"By all means."

Rapidly, in simple language, she acquainted him with
his situation. He was entitled to use the proceeds from his
share of the mines to purchase or construct a physical
estate, to staff it with serfs, robots, androids, cyborgs, or
anything else, and to indulge in any hobbies he wished.
The amount of credit available from his share was suffi-
cient to enable him to construct a moderate palace, hire
perhaps twenty-Eve serfs, and buy six robots of Sheen's
type. Expensive hobbies like exotic horse breeding or du-
plicating the Hanging Gardens of Babylon would have to
wait until the palace was complete. The income of a Citi-
zen was not limitless; it only seemed that way to serfs.

It was possible, however, to increase one's resources by
making and winning large wagers with other Citizens. Bets
of a year's income were not uncommon. However, if a Cit-
izen got two years in arrears, further wagers would not be
honored until he caught up. It was never permitted for a
Citizen to become destitute; a basic lifestyle had to be
maintained. Appearance was vital.

"I'll have no problems there," he said. "I'm not a gam-
bling man, outside the Game. I shall be a very conserva-
tive Citizen and live well within my income. Most of the
time I won't even be here, as you know."

Juxtaposition                      73

She nodded sadly. "Yes, sir. There's a note in the pro-
gram from my friends. They warn it is not safe for you to
stand pat. Forces are building rapidly. To protect yourself
you must soon develop your estate to a hundred times its
original magnitude. Within six months."

"A hundred times!" he exclaimed. "In six months!"

"And you must unravel the mystery that is associated
with your lasering, sir. Who sent me to protect you? My
friends have disturbing new evidence that this is not an
isolated event. Someone or something is interfering with
your life, and my friends can't discover who."

"Yes. And in Phaze, someone set the Red Adept against
me on a false alarm." He had had an extraordinary
amount of trouble in that connection, ending in the ban-
ishment of the Red Adept from both Phaze and Proton.
The Oracle had said Blue would destroy Red, and that had
proved correct—but none of that mischief would have
occurred if someone had not started the rumor that Blue
intended to attack Red.

"And there was that earthquake, sir, which you believe
is connected to events in Phaze," she continued. "Another
portent, perhaps."

"DeEnitely. The Platinum Elves informed me that I
would be involved in important developments, after my
honeymoon." Ooops—he had not meant to mention the
honeymoon to Sheen. He continued rapidly. "I'm not sure
I like the implication. I don't know what the linkages
between frames might be, but since a number of people
can cross, there can be interactions, perhaps quite serious
ones." He breathed deeply. "I was psychologically pre-
pared for banishment from Proton when I got eliminated
from the Tourney. I'm not so certain about how to pro-
ceed now that I have permanent tenure. I don't feel com-
fortable here in clothing."

"That is why you needed to isolate yourself, sir."

Stile got up and paced the small enclosure. "I promised
to return to Phaze by noon. I have already overrun that
deadline. Why don't you set in motion the machinery for
the establishment of my physical estate, and start hiring
serfs, while I cross the curtain to—"

"That might not be wise, sir."




74 Juxtaposition

-Her constant "sirs" were still getting on his nerves, but
he knew this was good conditioning. "Not wise?"

"You will need your money as a stake to multiply your
estate, sir, so should not fritter it away on nonessentials.
And if it became known that a machine was disposing
your assets—"

"I am a Citizen, aren't I? I can use a machine if I want
to, can't I?" Stile was irritated, not liking the implied slur
at Sheen.

"Yes, sir."

"So I'm appointing you my chief of staff, or whatever
the appropriate office is. I'd better hire a staff of serfs, for
appearances, and become a compulsive gambler. But I'll
lose my new fortune unless I have competent input. Will
your friends help?"

"They will, sir."

"Then ask them to locate an appropriate adviser for me.
One who knows how to break in a new Citizen."

"And how to escalate a Citizen's fortune rapidly, sir."

"Precisely. Now 1'U go Enisb my honey—uh, my busi-
ness in Phaze. Assuming I can get out of Proton un-
observed."

"A Citizen can, sir," she assured him. "If you will make
a brief, formal holo statement of authorization, so I can
draw on your funds—"

"Ah, yes." Stile took care of that immediately.

"Thank you, sir," she said, accepting the recording. "I
shall set the wheels in motion."

"Excellent. And I'll ponder what I can do for you and
your friends."

Sheen nodded, knowing he could do nothing for her.
She would serve him loyally and lovingly, regardless.

CHAPTER 5

Wes£ Pole

He was late, but the Lady Blue forgave him. "I had the
news before thee. Thou art a Citizen now."

"It's antidimactic," Stile complained. "Citizenship is the
ultimate prize of Proton. Now that I have it, it's mainly
a nuisance. Hidden forces decree that I must commence a
new and chancy course, to be ready for even more tension.
I wonder if this relates in any way to the promised mis-
chief at the West Pole?"

"How can such complications arise now?" the Lady
inquired rhetorically. "All we seek is a simple honey-
moon."

"Somehow I don't think we're going to have it."

They attended the snow. demons' banquet. It was mag-
nificent, in its fashion. Candied icicles for aperitif, ice-
burgers, fried avalanche, sludge freeze as a beverage, and
snow cones for dessert. The snow-demons pitched in with
gusto; Stile and the Lady nibbled with imperfect enthusi-
asm, until Stile sneaked in a small spell and changed their
morsels to items with food content concealed under snow
frosting.

At night, side by side in a surprisingly comfortable
snowbank, they talked. "I have a problem," Stile said qui-
etly.

"I think it must needs wait till the snowmen sleep," she
murmured. "They exhibit unseemly curiosity as to how
flesh-mortals perform without melting from generated
heat."

He patted her anatomy under the snow blanket, where
the curious demons couldn't see. "A Proton problem."

"The Lady Sheen."

"The lovely self-willed robot lady Sheen, who will not
75

76                      juxtaposition

accept reprogramming. I must work closely with her, for I
have agreed to help her machine friends. They helped me
survive when times were hard in Proton, and I must help
them achieve serf status now. And they warn me that
more trouble is coming; that I must gamble to enhance my
estate vastly and research to learn who sent Sheen in the
first place. I fear it links in some way to events in Phaze,
so I must follow through. Only I wish I didn't have to use
Sheen—take that in what sense thou wilt. It isn't fair to
her, and I feel guilty."

"As well thou might," she agreed. "I promised to con-
sider her case, and so I have done. Now let me see if I
have this right. The self-willed golems—machines—wish
recognition as people?"

"Correct. Serfs are the lowest people, but are more than
the highest machines. Serfs can play the Game, compete in
the Tourney, win privileges or even Citizenship. When
their tenure expires, they depart the planet with generous
cumulative pay. Machines are permitted none of this; they
are slaves until junked. Yet some are intelligent, conscious,
feeling."

"And the Lady Sheen is one of these unrecognized ma-
chine creatures."

"She is. She is in every way a person, with very real
emotions. They merely happen to be programmed, rather
than natural."

"And is there a difference between program and na-
ture?"

"I doubt it. Different means to similar ends, perhaps."

"Then thou must marry the Lady Sheen."

Stile paused. "I don't believe I heard thee properly,
Lady."

"It is the other frame. She can never cross the curtain.
Thou canst do as thou wilt with her there."

Stile had been growing sleepy. Now he was awakening.
"I am sure I am misunderstanding thee."

"If a Citizen marries a machine—"

"Nobody can marry a machine!"

"—then that machine must have—"

"Machines don't have—" Stile stopped. '1 wonder. The

Juxtaposition                      77

spouses of Citizens do not achieve Citizen status, but they
do have certain prerogatives. They are considered to be
employed—their employment being the marriage. And
only serfs are employable."

"So a married machine would be a serf," the Lady con-
cluded. "And if one machine were a serf—"

"The precedent—"

"Thinkest thou it would accomplish thy purpose?"

Stile considered, his head spinning. "If the marriage
stuck, it would be one hell of a lever for legal machine
recognition!"

"That was my notion," she said complacently.

"But I am married to thee!" he protested.

"In Phaze. Not in Proton."

"But thou canst cross over!"

"True. But I am of this frame, and never will I leave it
for aught save emergency. I have no claim on the things of
Proton, nor wish I any."

"But I love only thee! I could never—"

"Thou lovest more than thou knowest," she said with
gentle assurance. "Neysa, Sheen—"

"Well, there are different types of—"

"And I spoke not of love. I spoke of marriage."

"A marriage of convenience? To a robot?"

"Dost thou hold the Lady Sheen beneath convenience,
for that she be made of metal?"

"Nay! But—" He paused. "Nay, I must confess I do
think less of her. Always since I learned she was not real,
that—"

"Methinks thou hast some thinking to do," the Lady
Blue said, and turned her back.

Stile felt the reproach keenly. He was prejudiced; he had
great respect for Sheen, but love had been impossible be-
cause she was not flesh. Yet he reminded himself that he
had come closer to loving her before encountering the
Lady Blue. Had Sheen's nonliving nature become a pretext
for his inevitable change of heart? He could not be sure,
but he was unable to deny it.

How could he fight for the recognition of the sapient
self-willed machines if he did not recognize them as dis-




78

Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

79

Crete individuals himself? How could he many Sheen if he
did not love her? If he came to think of her as a real
person, wouldn't such a marriage make him a bigamist?
There were two frames, certainly, but he was only one
person. Yet since the Lady Blue had generously offered to
accept half-status, confining herself to Phaze—

Think of the commotion the marriage of a Citizen to a
robot would make in Proton I It would convulse the social
order! That aspect appealed to him. Yet—

"Wouldst thou settle for a betrothal?" he asked at last.

"An honest one," she agreed sleepily.

"Say six months. Time enough to get the legal issues
clarified, one way or the other. There would be formidable
opposition from other Citizens. And of course Sheen her-
self might not agree."

"She will agree," the Lady Blue said confidently. "A
betrothal is a commitment, and never wilt thou renege.
She will have some joy of thee at last."

This was not a way he had ever expected the Lady Blue
to speak, and Stile was uneasy. Yet perhaps she had some
concern of her own, knowing She had taken him away
from Sheen. Possibly the social mores of Phaze differed
from those of Proton in this respect, and sharing was more
permissible. Certainly his friend Kurrelgyre the werewolf
had believed it, assigning his bitch to a friend while Kur-
relgyre himself was in exile from his Pack. The Lady Blue
had met Sheen, liked her, and accepted her immediately as
a person; apparently that had not been any social artifice.

"And if in six months it is legal, then shall I marry her,"
Stile continued. "In Proton. But I can not love her."

"Then love me," the Lady Blue said, turning to him.

That was reward enough. But already Stile had a
glimpse of that controversy he was about to conjure, like a
savage magic storm.

In the morning they resumed their tour of the curtain,
recrossing the White Mountain range and bearing south-
west. There were some deep crevices on the ground; when
their steeds' hooves knocked sand into them, it fell down
and away beyond the limit of perception, soundlessly.
"Deep caves, mayhap," Stile remarked, a bit nervous

about a possible collapse of the footing. But Clip tapped
the ground with a forehoof, indicating that there was no
danger of a fall as long as a unicorn picked the way.

Stile checked his contour map and discovered they were
heading for the Black Demesnes. He did not like the Black
Adept, and by mutual consent they spelled rapidly past the
grim castle and well on toward the Purple Mountains.

Now the curtain bore directly south. Suddenly there was
an explosion of fire before them. Stile squinted at the
flame, trying to determine whether it was natural or magic.

"The wamers!" the Lady exclaimed. "The Green
Adept!"

"It must be," Stile agreed. "I promised to bypass him."

They went around, rejoining the curtain southwest of
Green's marked territory. The curtain was curving back
westward, through the foothills of the southern mountains.
The scenery was pleasant; waist-high bushes covered the
rolling terrain, topped with faintly purple flowers. The
steeds trotted through, finding firm footing beneath. The
midaftemoon sun slanted down.

Suddenly a creature jumped in front of Hinblue. The
thing had the body of a powerful man and the head of a
wolf. It bayed—and the horse spooked. The Lady Blue, an
expert rider, was not in any trouble; she brought her steed
about and calmed her.

Then a second creature appeared, this one with the head
of a ram. It bleated.

Stile's mind formulated a spell while his hand went for
his harmonica. But he withheld his magic, uncertain
whether it was necessary. He had heard of the animal-
heads, but understood they were not aggressive toward
human beings. Was his information mistaken?

More animalheads appeared, making their assorted
noises. Cats, goats, hawks, bears, turtles—none of them
with the intelligence or verbal ability of a man, but each
quite formidable in its fashion. They were all snarling,
squawking, roaring, or growling aggressively. A pighead
charged toward Stile, grunting.

"I fear they mean mischief," the Lady Blue said. "This
is not like them. Something has angered them, methinks."




80

juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

81

"Yes," Stile agreed. Clip's horn was holding the pighead
at bay, but a crocodilehead was circling to the rear. "We
had best avoid them till we know their motivation."

"Methinks we can outrun them," she said, concerned
but not worried.

Their steeds took Off. Hinblue was a fine mare, capable
of a galloping velocity that shamed ordinary horses; she
really did move like the wind. But Clip was a unicorn
whose inherent magic made him swifter yet. By common
consent they used no other magic, not revealing Stile's
status; Adepts were not necessarily favored in the back
reaches of Phaze.

The animalheads gave chase enthusiastically, baying,
bellowing, and hooting. But their human bodies could not
compare with the equine bodies, and they soon fell behind.
Yet two things narrowed the gap; this was animalhead
territory, more familiar to the beastmen than to the in-
truders; they could take the best paths and shortcuts, and
kept popping up just ahead. Also, there were a number of
them, so that a good many were already ranged along the
route, and these formed living barricades. This made the
chase dose enough for discomfort.

Three catfaces rose up before them. Both steeds, well
versed in this sort of thing, did not leap, for though they
could have cleared the creatures, they would in the process
have exposed their vulnerable underbellies to attack from
below. Instead they put their heads down and charged
low.

The catheads could have handled the horse, but not the
deadly hom of the unicorn. That horn could skewer a
standing creature instantly. The cats dropped down, giving
way, and the party galloped on unscathed.

Half a dozen pigheads appeared, grunting urgently. This
time the steeds leaped. The pigheads reached up, but their
weapons were their tusks, not good for vertical goring.
One got struck in the head by Hinblue's front hoof, and
the others desisted.

A pack of wolfheads closed in, but the steeds dodged
and galloped to the side and got around and through, then
put on speed to leave the beasts behind. No more animal-
heads appeared, and Stile knew that his party had gotten
away clean.

Unnoticed in the hurry, the vegetation had changed.
They were now forging through a forest of huge old trees
—oak, ash, elm, and beech, by the look. But it was not
necessarily easy to tell them apart, for the trunks were
gnarled and deeply corrugated, and the tops shaded the
ground into gloom.

*'! like not the look of this," the Lady Blue said.

Stile agreed. Their escape had led them away from the
curtain, so that they now had to relocate. It would not be
safe to return to their point of divergence from it; the
animalheads were there. Stile still preferred to avoid the
use of magic in the present situation; this was an annoy-
ance, not a crisis.

All of which meant they would have to search for the
curtain the tedious way—slowly, eyes squinting for the
almost invisible shimmer. The curtain was easy to follow
lengthwise, but difficult to intercept broadside unless one
knew exactly where to look.

"Well, it's all part of the honeymoon," Stile said. The
Lady smiled; she had known there would be this sort of
interruption in the schedule.

They looked, riding slowly around the great old trees.
The forest was so dense now that even indirect light hardly
penetrated, yet there were an increasing number of small
plants. They twined up around the bases of the tree trunks
and spread across the forest floor. Some were a suspi-
ciously verdant green; others were pallid white. Many were
insidiously ugly.

Yet they were plants, not creatures. None of them sent
questing tentacles for the intruders; none had poisonous
thorns. They flourished in gloom; that seemed to be their
only oddity.

There was no sign of the curtain. "It will take forever to
find it this way," Stile said. "I want to be back on it by
nightfall." He jumped down and walked. "We can make a
better search on foot," he said.

Clip blew a warning note. Unicorns were naturally resis-
tant to magic, and this protected the rider. The Blue Adept,




82                      Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

Clip felt, needed protection, and should not be straying
from his steed. As if Stile did not have ample magic of his
own.

Stile walked on, peering this way and that, searching for
the curtain. It had to be somewhere near here; they had
not gone all that far and they had not diverged from its
path greatly. In this gloom the shimmer should be clear
enough.

Clip's ears turned. He blew a low warning note. Stile
paused to listen.

The animalheads were catching up. Stile's party had to
move on before—

Too late. A pigface appeared in front of Stile. A dog-
face came up behind the Lady. There was rustling in the
bushes all around. Perhaps aided by some sort of stealth-
spell, the animalheads had surrounded them.

The Lady called Hinblue, who charged toward her. Stile
stepped toward Clip, but already tile pighead was on him.
Stile did not use magic. He drew his sword, threatening
but not attacking the creature. There was something odd
about this, and he did not want to do anything irrevocable
until he fathomed it.

The pighead halted its aggression—but three sheepheads
were closing from the sides. A spell would freeze them,
but Stile still didn't want to do it. Rather than shed blood,
he dodged around the pighead, hurdled a fallen branch—
and an offshoot moved up and intercepted his leading
ankle, causing him to take a heavy spill into a flowering
bush beyond.

There was a kind of zap! as the leaves were disturbed,
and Stile felt the presence of magic. Quickly he jumped
up, feeling about his body, but he seemed to have suffered
no injury.

The animalheads had taken advantage of his fall to
surround him. Clip had stopped a short distance away,
perceiving that the animalheads could reach Stile before
the unicorn could. No sense precipitating an attack by
spooking them.

Stile decided to make an honest attempt at communica-
tion before resorting reluctantly to magic to freeze them

juxtaposition                      83

temporarily in place. It wasn't natural for normally peace-
ful creatures to attack and pursue strangers like this.
Maybe he could establish a yes-no dialogue with one of
the more intelligent ones. He really wasn't looking for
trouble on his honeymoon!

He opened his mouth to speak—and nothing but air
emerged. He couldn't talk!

Stile tried again. There was no pain, no constriction in
his throat—but he could not vocalize at all. The plant—it
had zapped him with a spell of silencel

The animalheads did not know about his power of
magic, so did not know what he had lost. They thought
him an ordinary man—which he was now. They con-
verged.

Stile quickly brought the harmonica to his mouth. He
might not be able to speak or sing, but the instrument's
music would summon some protective magic. He blew—
and silence came out.

He stamped his foot on the ground and made no noise.
He banged his sword against a root—silently. He whistled
•—without even a hiss of air.

The spell had rendered him totally quiet. Since he could
nullify it only by using his own magic, and that required
sound, he was trapped.

These tests had been performed rapidly, and the conclu-
sion drawn in a few seconds, for the animalheads were on
him. Still he did not use his sword. He had threatened with
it, but remained unwilling actually to shed blood. The
mystery of these creatures' attack bothered him as much
as the threat to himself.

A cathead pounced. Stile ducked, reached up, and
guided it into a turning fall. He might be silent, but he
wasn't helpless!

But now a tremendously tusked hoarhead came at him
from the left and an alligatorhead from the right. There
was no question of their intent. He could dodge these
two—but how long could he hold out against the converg-
ing mob?

Meanwhile, Clip had resumed motion. Now the unicorn
arrived. His horn caught the alligatorbead and impaled it.

84                      juxtaposition

A powerful heave sent the creature flying back over the
equine's shoulder. Then a forehoof knocked the hoarhead

away.

Clip stood beside Stile, giving him a chance to mount.

Then they were away in a great leap. Soon they joined
Hinblue and the Lady Blue and galloped clear of the ani-

malheads once again.

The Lady Blue realized what was wrong. "Thou art

victim of a silence-spelll" she cried. "We must take thee
back to the Blue Demesnes for a counterspelll"

But the animalheads were already catching up again,
cutting off the return—and of course it would be a long
ride all the way back to the Blue Demesnes, even cutting
directly across to it. Their only avenue of escape at the
moment was north, deeper into the jungle.

The steeds plunged on, but the vegetation thickened.
Now grasping plants occurred, reaching thorny branches
toward them, opening green jawlike processes. This jungle
was coming alive—at the time when Stile had lost his
power. A single spell could quell every plant—but he

could not utter that spell.

The Lady Blue exclaimed as vines twined about her
body. Her steed had to halt, lest she be drawn off. Then
the vines attacked Hinblue's legs, seeking to anchor the

horse to the ground.

Stile nudged Clip. The unicorn charged back. His horn
touched the vines, and they writhed out of the way, re-
pelled by the countennagic. Meanwhile, Stile used his
sword to chop at the nether vines, freeing the horse. The
weapon normally carried by men in Phaze was the rapier,
but Stile felt more comfortable with the broadsword, and

now the cutting edge was useful indeed.
There was a renewed baying of animalheads, catching

up yet again. Stile's party moved forward once more.

The plants got worse. Tree branches dropped down to
bar their way, dangling poisonous-looking moss. Stile cut
the moss away with his sword, clearing the path for the
Lady and steeds. Ichor from the moss soon covered the
blade, turning it gray-green. The stuff reeked with a pun-
gent odor, almost like dragon's blood. Stile did not like

Juxtaposition                      85

this at all. Yet he had to keep hacking the encroaching
growth away, afraid to let any of the party get caught.

At last the sounds of pursuit diminished. The animal-
heads had been foiled by this vicious jungle too.

But the trees, bushes, and brambles had closed in be-
hind, forming a virtually impenetrable barrier. Stile's
sword was already stained and pitted under the ichor, and
holes were appearing in his clothing where drops had spat-
tered. He didn't want to hack through any more of this!

Clip blew a musical note. Stile dismounted, and the
unicorn phased into the hawk and flew up. The sky was
the one open route!

The Lady Blue also dismounted and came to him.
"Mayhap I can help thee," she offered. She laid her hands
on his throat, and their healing power warmed skin and
muscle deep inside. But the silence was not any constric-
tion in his throat, but a cloud of nonsound that sur-
rounded him. He could not be healed because he wasn't
ill; the spell itself had to be abated, somehow.

"Mayhap a potion?" the Lady mused, fishing in her
purse. But none of the elixirs she had with her seemed
promising, and she did not want to expend them uselessly.
"Clip may find something," she said hopefully. "From the
air, more can be seen."

The jungle was not being idle, however. Plants were
visibly growing toward them. This time they were ugly,
jointed things, with great brown thorns hooked at each
juncture. These things were structured to engage a retreat-
ing form, and not to disengage, and they looked as if they
had hollow points. Bloodsuckers, surely. Stile brought out
his knife and sawed off the nearest thorn stem, severing it
with difficulty; the fiber was like cable. By the time he
completed the cut, several other tendrils were approaching
his boots. He had to draw his sword again, hacking the
fibers apart by brute force, clearing a circle around the
Lady and horse. He had almost forgotten how formidable
nature could be for those who lacked the convenience of
magic. It was a reminder in perspective—not that that
helped much at the moment.

The hawk returned, changing into man-fomi. "There is




T

86

Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

87

a domicile ahead, and the land is clear around it," Clip
reported. "An old man lives there, a hermit by his look;

mayhap he will guide us out, can we but reach him. Or we
can follow the curtain; it passes through that clearing. I
have scouted the most direct approach to the curtain. I
can not cross it, but if thou and the Lady and Hinblue
can—the clearing is but a quarter mile from there."

Stile squeezed Clip's arm in thanks. The unicorn had
really come through for theml They could hack their way
to the curtain, cross to Proton, hurry forward, and recross
to recover breath. It would not be fun, but it should be
feasible.

They chopped through the undergrowth with renewed
will. This time the plants were rigidly fan-shaped leaves on
tough stems, the edges of the leaves as sharp as knives.
They did not move to intercept people, but they were
extraordinarily difficult to dear from the path because the
stems were almost inaccessible behind the leaves. When
Stile reached under to sever one stem, the leaves of an-
other plant were in his way; if he sliced through anyway,
he risked brushing the knife-edges along his wrist or fore-
arm. Without magic to heal cuts, he found this nervous
business, though he knew the Lady could help heal him.
Progress was slow, and his sword arm grew tired.

Clip stepped in, using the tip of his horn to reach past
the leaves to break the stems. This enabled them to go
faster, and soon they intersected the curtain.

Stile could not even perform the simple curtain-crossing
spell. The Lady did it for him and Hinblue—and suddenly
the three of them were in Proton, on a barren plain, gasp-
ing for air. Clip changed to hawk-form and flew directly to
their rendezvous in the clearing.

They were able to walk on the bare sands, but breathing
was labored, and Hinblue, as the Lady had feared, did not
understand at all. The horse's nostrils flared, and she was
skittish, squandering energy better saved for forward prog-
ress. Hinblue was a very fine mare, who could have been a
prizewinner in Proton, but she had had no experience with
this. The Lady led her, though the Lady herself was gasp-
ing.

Stile heard his own labored breathing—and realized

what it meant. "I'm not silent any more—no magic in this
frame!" he exclaimed.

"But when thou retumest—" the Lady responded.

When he crossed again, the spell would still be on him.
He could not escape it this way, except by traveling in this
frame back to the region of the Blue Demesnes, where he
could cross to get the Lady's reserve spells. But no Proton
dome was near; even if he wanted to risk entering one, the
trip wasn't feasible.

The horse was in increasing trouble. "My Lord, I must
take her back," the Lady gasped. "She does not under-
stand."

Stile had handled a horse in these barrens before. He
recognized the symptoms of the growing panic. "Take her
across; maybe we're far enough."

They willed themselves across at what seemed to be a
clearing. It was—but also turned out to be no safe resting
place. The ground writhed with sucker leaves that sought
to fasten to the flesh of human or equine. Hinblue stamped
her hooves, trampling down the suckers, but already some
were fastening on the sides of the hooves, trying to drink
from the hard surface. Stile tried to cut off the plants, but
they were too low to the ground, making his blade ineffec-
tive.

"We can not stay here," the Lady said, her feet moving
in a dance of avoidance. "We must cross again."

Stile agreed. The horse had recovered her wind. They
crossed back to Proton and made a dash for the better
clearing ahead. This time they made it.

Now they were in sight of the hermit's hut. Clip re-
joined them, remaining in hawk-form so as not to betray
his nature before the watching hermit. They saw the old
man's eyes peering from the dark window.

"He sees us," the Lady said. "We shall need his help, for
we cannot go through more of this jungle or through
Proton."

Stile could only nod. He didn't like this situation at all.
Some honeymoon they were having!

The Lady went up to talk to the hermit. But the old
man slammed the rickety door and refused to answer her
call.




88 juxtaposition

Stile began to get angry. The hawk made a warning cry,
and Stile stayed back. Clip had caught on to something
important, by his attitude.

The Lady Blue gave it up. "Surely the hermit knows our
predicament, but he will help us not," she said. The touch
of a flush on her cheeks betrayed her irritation.

-The hawk spoke again, then flew to the ground and
scratched a place bare. In that spot he gouged out a word:

ORANGE.

The Lady was first to catch on. "The Orange Adepti No
wonder he is such a curmudgeon!"

Stile signaled, pointing to himself and raising an eye-
brow questioningly. He wanted to know whether the
Orange Adept was aware of the identity of his visitors.

Clip thought not. This was merely the way the Adept
treated all strangers. Few Adepts cared what happened to
those who intruded on their Demesnes, and those Adepts
who did care, generally were malignant. Stile had encoun-
tered the syndrome before, but he did not like it any better
with repetition.

They walked to the far side of the clearing, while the
beady eyes of Orange peered from the window of his hut.
Here the curtain plunged into the thickest of the bramble
tangles. Hinblue tried to trample them down, but they
wrapped around her foreleg, making her squeal in pain as
the thorns dug in. There was a snicker from the hut.

Stile slashed at the mass with his sword, but no matter
how many stems he severed, the mass held its form, like a
pile of brush. It would be necessary to draw each severed
stem out and set it in the clearing—and each stem seemed
to interlink with others, so that the entire mass tended to
come loose, falling about his bare arms and scratching.
The hermit sniggered, enjoying this.

After a time, scratched and sweaty and tired, they gave
it up. They could not get through this way. But mean-
while, the clearing had diminished; new plants were en-
croaching, and they looked just as ugly as the brambles.
The Orange Adept's mode of magic evidently related to
plants. Indeed, it must have been one of his creatures that
silenced Stile. Now the old man was enjoying watching
the flies struggle in the web.

Juxtaposition                      89

"Mayhap the other side of the curtain, again . . ." the
Lady said. But at her words Hinblue's ears went back, her
nostrils distended, and the whites showed around her eyes.
She did not want to brave the oxygen-poor, polluted air of
Proton again t

Yet they couldn't remain here. By nightfall the advanc-
ing plants would leave them no opening, and they would
have to fight for their lives while the Orange Adept
laughed. Stile was furious with frustration, but unable to
oppose this magic with his own.

Still, he could act directly against the malignant Adept.
He put his hand on his sword, facing the hut.

"Nay, my love," the Lady cautioned. "There are worse
plants than these, and surely they protect him. We must
not approach him."

She was right. Stile had to contain his rage.

Clip flew up and away, searching for some way out. The
Lady calmed Hinblue. One thing about the Lady Blue—
she did not lose her nerve in a crisis. She was in all
respects an admirable woman, his ideal and his beloved.
Before Stile let her suffer, he would charge the hut and
menace the Adept with his sword, heedless of whatever
plants might make their hideous presence known. But first
he would wait for Clip, hoping the unicorn would be able
to help.

The sun descended inexorably, and the plants continued
to close in. Some were like giant vines, with flowers that
resembled the orifices of carnivorous worms. Transparent
sap beaded in those throats, and drooled from the nether
petals like saliva. The sword should stop these—but what
would happen when darkness closed? Stile did not want to
fight these plants at night.

Clip returned. He landed behind the Lady, so that he
could not be seen from the hut, and changed to man-form.
"I may have found help," he reported, but he seemed
dubious.

"Out with it, 'corn," the Lady snapped.

"I saw no way out of this garden of tortures; it is miles
thick. So I searched for other creatures who might assist,
but found only a lone-traveling troll."

"A troUl" the Lady cried, distraught. "No help therel"

90 Juxtaposition

She was tolerant of many creatures, but hated trolls, for a
tribe of them had once tried to ravish her. Stile knew
that his alternate self, the former Blue Adept, had had a
bad altercation with trolls who had massacred his whole
home village and been in turn massacred by him.

"Yet this one seems different," Clip continued. "He
travels by day, which is unusual; he was voluminously
swathed in black cloth, so that no sunlight might touch
him, but I knew his nature by his outline." He wrinkled
his nose. "And by his smell." Trolls tended to have a dank-
earth ambience.

"Why should a troll travel by day?" the Lady asked,
intrigued despite her revulsion. "They are horrors of the
night, turning to stone in sunlight."

"Precisely. So I inquired, expecting an insult. But he
said he was in quest of the Blue Adept, to whom he owes a
favor." Clip shrugged in seeming wonder.

Stile looked askance at this. He had had no commerce
with trolls!

"That's what he said," Clip continued. "I was skeptical,
fearing more mischief, but, mindful of thy plight, I inves-
tigated. 'What favor canst thine ilk do for the likes of the
Adept?' I inquired politely. And quoth he, T am to bring
him to a plant this night.' And quoth I, *How can the
Adept trust a monster like thee?' and quoth he, *He spared
me in my youth, and him I owe the favor of a life—mine
or his. He may kill me if he wishes, or follow me to the
plant. Only then will part of mine onus be acquitted.' And
I said, 'He can not be reached at the moment,' and he said,
'Needs must I go to him now, for only tonight can the first
part of my debt be abated,' and I said—"

"Enoughl" The lady cried in exasperation. "I know him
now. That is the troll my Lord spared a score of years ago.
Perhaps that one, of all his ilk, can be trusted. But how
can he get here?"

"I was just telling thee," the unicorn replied, hurt. "I
said, 'How canst thou pass an impassable barrier of
thorns?' and he said he was a troll, skilled at tunneling,
like all his kind."

"Tunneling!" the Lady exclaimed, her face illuminating.

Juxtaposition                      91

"It will take time, for rock is hard, but he promised to
be here by midnight."

By midnight. Could they hold out against the encroach-
ing plants until then? They would have to!

It was a mean, harrowing interim, but they held out. At
the crack of midnight the ground shuddered and the gro-
tesque head of the troll emerged into the wan moonlight,
casting two shadows. The big eyes blinked. "The night is
painfully bright," the creature complained.

"This is Trool the troll," Clip introduced. "And (his is
the Blue Adept, who does not deign to address thee at this
time. Lead him to thy plant."

The troll sank back into the earth. Stile followed, find-
ing a fresh tunnel large enough for hands and knees. The
Lady came last. Clip shifted back to his natural form and
stood with Hinblue, defending against the plants. If Stile
did not recover his power and return in time to help them,
only the unicorn would survive.

The tunnel continued interminably, winding about to
avoid the giant roots of trees and buried boulders. Stripped
of his magic. Stile began to feel claustrophobic. If there
were a cave-in, what spell could he make? But he had to
trust the troll—the one his other self had spared, long
before Stile came to Phaze. For this creature felt he had a
debt to the Blue Adept, and Stile now held that office. He
could try to explain the distinction between himself and
his dead other self to the troll, but doubted this would
matter. What use to inform Trool that he had come too
late, that the one who had spared him was already gone?
Better to let the troll discharge his debt and be free.

At last they emerged beyond the Orange Adept's garden.
Stile straightened up with relief. They continued on until
the troll halted beside a nondescript bush. "This is the
plant," Trool said. His voice was guttural and harsh, in the
manner of his kind. What made it unusual was the fact
that it was intelligible. He must have practiced hard on
human speech.

The Lady leaned forward to peer at the growth in the
waning light of the blue moon. Her face was somewhat
gaunt, and Stile knew she feared betrayal; certainly the

92 Juxtaposition

troll's appearance was somewhat too providential. "This is
the herb I needl" she exclaimed in gratiEed wonder. "It
will cancel half the spelll"

Half? What else was needed?

^The touch of the horn of a unicorn," she said, under-
standing his thought.

So he could not be cured until they returned to Clip.
His magic would have to wait; he could not use it to
facilitate things now.

The Lady took the leaves-she needed and thanked the
troll a bit diffidently. Trool, perhaps unaware of the cause
of her mixed feelings, shrugged and departed, his deed
done. They started the trip back to the Orange Demesnes.

It was no more pleasant traversing the tunnel the second
time, but at least the route was familiar. Dawn was ap-
proaching as Stile finally felt the end and poked his head
up through the surface of the ground—only to find it
overgrown with vines. Were they too late?

He wrestled his broadsword out and around and began
slashing and sawing. The plants, attacked from below,
capitulated quickly, and soon Stile and the Lady stood in
their own little hacked-out clearing.

He heard grunts and thumps in the direction of the
hermit's hut. The yellow moon was now out, showing two
equine figures backed against the hut wall, still fighting off
the encroaching foliage. Perhaps the plants were less active
at night, unable to grow as fast without sunlight; or maybe
the Orange Adept was saving the finale for morning, when
he could see better. At any rate, the end was not quite
yet. '

Stile hacked a path across the writhing mass of vegeta-
tion, the Lady following and tidying things up with her
knife. As the sun broke across the eastern horizon, they
reached the equines.

Hinblue was sweating and bleeding from numerous
scratches, and was so tired she hardly seemed able to stay
on her feet. Clip was better off, but obviously worn; his
horn swung in short vicious arcs to intercept each reaching
tendril. There was very little room left for the two of
them; soon the press of plants and their own fatigue would
overwhelm them.

Juxtaposition                      93

And the Orange Adept peered out of his window, grin-
ning as if at an exhibition. This was his private arena, his
personal entertainment, and he was enjoying it immensely.
Stile experienced a flare of primal rage.

Now it was the Lady's turn to act. "Take these leaves,"
she told Stile, giving him the branch she had taken from
the troll's bush. "Clip—thy hom, please." The unicorn
paused in his combat with the foliage. Guided by the
Lady, he touched his hom to the leaves in Stile's hands.

Stile felt something ease, as if he had been released from
an ugly threat. He heard his own breathing. "I thank thee,"
he said.

Then he did a double take. "Hey, I can speaki"

"Do thou speak some suitable spell," the Lady sug-
gested, nipping off a reaching tendril'with her small knife.

Quickly Stile summoned a general-purpose spell from
his repertoire. "All save me, in stasis be," he sang.

He had not taken time to coalesce his magic force with
preliminary music, so the spell was not fully effective, but
its impact was nevertheless considerable. The aggressive
plants stopped advancing, and Stile's three companions
stood stunned.

Only the Orange Adept proved immune. His head swiv-
eled to cover Stile. "What's this?" the man demanded
querulously. "Foreign magic in my Demesnes?"

Now Stile let out his long-accumulating wrath. "Oaf,
didst know not against whom thou didst practice thy foul
enchantment?"

"I know not and care not, peasant!" Orange snapped,
sneering.

"Then learn, thou arrogant louti" Stile cried. He took
his harmonica, played a few savage bars to summon his
power, then sang: "Let every single spellbound plant,
against its master rave and ranti"

Instantly there was chaos. The magic plants rotated on
their stems, reorienting on the Orange Adept. Now the
tendrils reached toward the hut, ignoring the visiting party.

"Hey!" Orange screamed, outraged. But a thorny tendril
twined about his hand, causing him to divert his attention
to immediacies.

Stile made a subspell nullifying the remaining stasis-

94 Juxtaposition

spell, and equines and Lady returned to animation. Stile
and the Lady mounted their steeds, and Stile made a spell
to heal and invigorate them. Then they rode out through
the vicious plants, which ignored this party in their eager-
ness to close on the hut.

"That was not nice, my Lord Blue," the Lady mur-
mured somewhat smugly.

"Aye," Stile agreed without remorse. "The plants can't
really hurt Orange. He will find a way to neutralize them.
But I dare say it will be long before every plant is back the
way it was. And longer before he bothers passing strangers
again."

When they emerged from the Orange Demesnes, Stile
guided them southeast, back toward the region of the ani-
malheads. The Lady glanced at him questioningly, but did
not comment.

The animalheads appeared. "Know, 0 creatures, that I
am the Blue Adept," Stile said. "Guide me to your leader."

When they pressed forward menacingly, he resorted to
magic. "Animalhead, be friend instead," he sang. And the
attitude of each one changed. Now they were willing to
take him where he had asked.

Soon they encountered an elephanthead, with a giant fat
body to support so large an extremity. The creature trum-
peted in confusion.

"Each to each, intelligible speech," Stile sang.

"To what do we owe the questionable pleasure of this
visit?" the nasal trumpetings translated, now having the
semblance of ordinary human speech.

"I am the Blue Adept," Stile said. "This is my Lady
Blue. We are on our honeymoon, touring the curtain with
our steeds. We seek no quarrel and do not believe we pro-
voked thy creatures. Why did they attack us?"

The elephanthead considered, his trunk twisting uncer-
tainly. He was evidently loath to answer, but also wary of
openly defying an Adept. "We sent a person to inquire of
the Oracle, after the shaking of the mountains alarmed us.
Hard times may be coming to Phaze, and we are con-
cerned about survival."

"So are we," Stile said. "But we understand we have a
safe fortnight for our pleasure journey to the West Pole,

r

Juxtaposition                      95

and thereafter the Lady Blue will have time to bear my
son. So the end of Phaze is not quite yet. But why should
you interfere with us?"

"The Oracle advised us that if we permitted a man
riding a unicorn to pass our demesnes, half our number
would perish within the month."

Suddenly the attitude of the animalheads made sense.
"The Oracle claims I am a threat to thy kind?" Stile asked
incredulously. "I have had no intention of harming thy
creaturesi"

"The Oracle did not say thou hast intent; only the con-
sequence of thy passage."

"Let me meet the bearer of this message."

A snakehead came forward. Rendered intelligible by
Stile's spell, she repeated the message: "Let pass the man
on 'corn, and half will die within the month."

The Lady Blue's brow furrowed. "That is an either-or
message, unusual. Can it be a true Oracle?"

"The Oracle is always true," the elephanthead said.

"But just let me check the messenger," Stile said, catch-
ing on to the Lady's suspicion. He faced the snakehead,
played his harmonica, and sang: "Lady Snakehead, tell me
true: what the Oracle said to do."

And she repeated: "Let pass the man on 'corn, and half
will die within the month. Prevent him, and in that period
all will die."

The elephanthead gave a trumpet of amazement. "Half
the message! Why didst thou betray us so, snake?"

"I knew not—" she faltered.

"She was enchanted," the Lady Blue said. "By someone
who bore ill will to us all."

The elephanthead was chagrined. "Who would that be?"

"Ask first who could have done it," Stile said.

"Only another Adept," the elephanthead said. "We are
enchanted creatures, resistant to ordinary magic, else we
would change our forms. Only Adepts can play with oui
bodies or minds."

"So I suspected," Stile said. "I could not prevail against
thy kind until I used my magic. Could this be the handi-
work of the Orange Adept?"

"Nay. He dislikes us, as he dislikes all animate crea-

96 Juxtaposition

tures, even himself. But he has no power over aught save
plants."

"Still, a plant can affect a person," Stile said, thinldng of
the silence-spell that had so inconvenienced him.

But when he used another spell to check what had hap-
pened to the snakehead, it showed her being intercepted by
a weaselhead woman, seemingly her own kind, who drew a
diagram in the dirt that made a flash of light.

"The White Adept!" Stile exclaimed. "I know her mode
of magic and know she likes me not."

"We also do not get along with her," the elephanthead
agreed. "We apologize to thee. Blue, for our misunder-
standing. We shall not again attempt to do thee ill."

"Accepted," Stile said. "Let us part friends, and if we
meet again, it shall be to help each other."

"Thou art generous."

"I like animals." Stile did not see fit to remind the
animalheads that they still stood to lose half their number
soon. Real mischief was brewing, according to the proph-
ecy.

"We like not Adepts, but to thee we shall be friend."
And so they parted on a positive note.

Stile and the Lady proceeded north along the curtain.
But they were tired; they had not slept the past night.
When a suitable camping spot manifested, they camped.
There was a streamlet, a fine old apple tree, and a metal
object lying on its side. It was about six feet in diameter,
roughly cup-shaped, with a number of depressions on the
outer surface, as if someone had dented it with small
boulders. It seemed to be made entirely of silver; anywhere
except Phaze, it would have been phenomenally valuable.
Here, of course, such artifacts could be conjured magically.

A storm was rising. "Would this be a good chamber in
which to spend the day and night?" Stile inquired. "It
seems watertight."

Clip glanced up from his grazing, blowing a single nega-
tive note.

Stile shrugged. "The unicorn says no; who am I to argue
with such authority?" And he conjured a suitable tent
beside the metal structure.

They slept in the shade of the tent while the equines

T

Juxtaposition

97

grazed and slept on their feet and stood guard simul-
taneously.                              ,,,,,.
In the late afternoon. Stile woke to an awful shuddering

of the ground. He leaped out of the tent.

Clip stood there in man-form. "If thou pleasest, Adept,
make a flare above us in the sky that anyone can see."

Stile obeyed. "Make a flare up there," he sang, pointing
upward. It was like a rocket exploding in brilliant colors.

The shuddering increased. A monstrous shape appeared,
towering above the trees. "WHERE?" it bellowed.

It was a female human-form giant, so big Stile could not
even estimate her height.

"Tell her there," Clip said, indicating the metal struc-
ture.

Stile magicked a bright arrow in the sky, pointing
toward the silver artifact. The giant saw this, followed the
direction with her gaze, and leaned down to grasp the
thing. Her near approach was harrowing; it seemed as if a
building were falling on them, but the small party stood its
ground.

"My silver thimble!" the giantess exclaimed, lifting the
tiny object into the sky. "My lost thimble! Who found it
for me?"

Stile made sky writing: BLUE ADEPT, with an arrow
pointing to himself.

She squinted down from above the clouds. "I thank
thee. Blue Adept," she boomed. "What favor may I return
thee?"

ONLY THY GOOD WILL, Stile skywrote, daunted.
One small misstep and the giantess could crush this entire
region flat.

"Granted," she said, and departed with her prize.

"Thou knewest!" Stile accused Clip. "A giantess' silver
thimble, six feet across!"

"Giants are good people," Clip agreed smugly. "They
have long memories too. Best to be on the right side of a
giant."

"I should think so," Stile agreed. "And best not to sleep
in a giant thimble."

He conjured a modest repast for himself and the Lady,
and some grain to supplement the diet of the equines,

98

Juxtaposition

since they had used so much of their strength the prior
night. Then he and the Lady returned to the tent for the
night. As he drifted off to sleep the second time, it oc-
curred to Stile that Clip had been giving excellent service.
Stile's favorite was Neysa, his oath-friend, but Clip was
certainly a worthy substitute. He would have to ponder
some favor to do for the unicorn after this was over, as a
suitable reward for such things as helping to save Stile's
life and dignity. It was hard to do favors for unicorns,
because all of them were subject to their Herd Stallions.
But perhaps Stile could dear something with the unicorn
hierarchy.

In the morning, refreshed, they resumed the journey.
The assorted interruptions had put them behind Stile's
schedule; now they had to move along to reach the West
Pole before he had to return to Proton.

The curtain curved west through the land of the giants.
To Stile's relief they encountered no more of the gigantic
people. At noon they came to the ocean.

"But the curtain goes right into the water," Stile pro-
tested.

"Of course. The West Pole is on an island," the Lady
said. "Conjure a boat."

"But I want to follow the curtain where it touches land."
Stile had no special reason for this; he had merely envi-
sioned walking along the curtain, not sailing.

"Then conjure away the ocean," she said gaily.

Instead, Stile enchanted them so that the water became
like air to them. They walked down into the ocean as if
passing through mist, the steeds stepping over the green-
coated rocks of the bottom. Fish swam by, seemingly in
midair. Seaweed waved in breezelike currents, always sur-
prising Stile since they seemed to lack sufficient support.

Deep down, the light faded, so Stile sang a spell of night
vision, making things seem bright. Interesting, how he
could use his underwater speaking ability, which was the
result of one spell, to make a new spell; magic could be
cumulative. Thus it was possible to get around certain
limitations in stages. It helped explain how one Adept
could kill another, indirectly, by modifying a message so
that it caused animalheads to attack an Adept and drive

T

juxtaposition                      99

him into the Demesnes of a hostile Adept. Perhaps there
were no real limits, only techniques of procedure.

At the deepest level of the sea there was a stirring, and a
merman appeared. "Lost thy way?" he inquired of Stile.
"We see not many fork-limbed creatures here." He was
evidently possessed of the type of enchantment Stile had
employed to penetrate the water. It seemed there were
natural principles of magic that came into play, whether
by spell or by endowment. Stile's understanding of Phaze
was constantly expanding.

"I am the Blue Adept," Stile said. "This is my Lady, and
these our steeds. We merely pass through, following the
curtain, seeking no quarrel."

"Then permit us to guide thee, for there are traps for
the unwary." The merman pointed ahead. "Not far from
here a hungry sea serpent straddles the curtain. It cares
not for the peaceful intent of travelers."

"I thank thee for thy concern. But we are on our
honeymoon, and promised ourselves to travel the length of
the curtain where possible, seeking the West Pole. We are
late on our schedule and prefer not to detour."

"That serpent is fearsome," the merman warned. "None
of us dare go near it. Yet if that is thy will, we will not
hinder thee." He swam off.

"See thou hast an apt spell ready," the Lady advised,
smiling, making the water brighten in her vicinity.

Stile reviewed the spells in his mind, and they rode on.
He enjoyed the scenery here, so different from the normal
land vistas. Clams of all sizes were waving their feeding
nets in the water, and coral-like growths were spreading
everywhere. A small yellow octopus eyed them, then noted
the menacing unicorn horn and scurried hastily away on
all tentacles, leaving a purple ink cloud behind. Stile
smiled; this was exactly the kind of honeymoon he likedl

Then they arrived at the lair of the serpent. It was not
impressive—merely a tunnel under piled stones. In a mo-
ment the ugly snout of the serpent poked out. This crea-
ture was not large, as such monsters went; probably one
man would represent a sufficient meal for it. But there was
no sense taking chances. "Please freeze," Stile sang, and
the serpent went still. The freezing was not literal, for Stile

100 Juxtaposition

had willed only a temporary cessation of motions; his
mind controlled the interpretation.

They moved on past. A large, heavy net rose up about
them and twined itself together overhead. Stile reacted
immediately, whipping out his sword and slashing at the
strands—but the blade could not penetrate this net.

Clip ran his horn through it, but again the material
held. "This net is magic," the Lady said. 'The fibers are
enchanted to be strong."

So it seemed. The net itself was magically weighted, so
that they could not lift it free of the sea floor, and it was
impossible to cut or break.

Stile worked out a spell: "Pesky net, begone yetl" he
sang. But though color shimmered across the net's surface,
the net remained intact.

'This is the handiwork of another Adept," the Lady
said darkly. 'Thy power cancels out. In this Adept's
Demesnes, thou canst not prevail."

"Maybe not directly," Stile said. He was getting tired of
running afoul of other Adeptsl "But I'can change us into
little fishes, and swim through the mesh and escape."

"Me thou canst change," she agreed. "But thyself thou
couldst not change back, since fish can neither speak nor
sing. And the hostile Adept might have a monster lurking
to pounce on such little fish. Risk it not, my Lord."

It was the voice of common sense. In his present form,
Stile could guard them against further evil; anything else
was too much of a risk. "Yet needs must we slip this net,"
he grumbled.

Clip blew a note. "There is that," Stile agreed. "I will
watch and guard thee until thou dost clear this vicinity."

The unicorn converted to hawk-form, then squeezed
through the net where Stile parted the strands for him.
The hawk flew swiftly upward while Stile watched, defen-
sive spells ready.

Now a man walked up. He was ordinary in physical
appearance, but wore a robe of translucent material that
distorted the light and made him seem one with the water.
"Thy friend can not help thee from outside, either," he
said. "Thou wilt never escape my Demesnes, Blue."

Juxtaposition

101

Stile nodded. "Thou must be the Translucent Adept. I
have read of thee, but knew not thy residence."

"No one knows my residence," Translucent said. "Who
intrudes, pays the price of silence."

"Why shouldst thou harbor evil against me, who has
done thee no ill?"

"Thine ill lies in the future. Blue. An thou dost reach
the West Pole, the final battle shall be upon us, and no
augur knows what will then befall."

"Dost thou mean to say thou hast had a hand in the
mischief I have suffered?" Stile inquired. These might be
the Translucent Demesnes, but Stile could strike out if he
had reason.

"This net is mine, useful to snare intruders. I have not
otherwise wrought ill on thee. Dost thou know the nature
of thine adversary?"

"I dispatched the Red Adept," Stile said shortly.

"Red was but an instrument, deluded by a false inter-
pretation of an Oracle—as were the beastheads. Another
trap was laid for thee near the Green Demesnes, but
Green wished not to be implicated, so he nullified it.
Adepts bother not Adepts without cause."

This man was surprisingly informed about Stile's busi-
ness. "Thou dost consider I gave thee cause for this?" Stile

indicated the net.

"By intruding on these my Demesnes thou hast given
me cause. I tolerate that not. The net was not set for thee,
but for intruders. Never have I let an intruder go, and I
need make no exception for thee. This does not implicate

me in the conspiracy."

"Conspiracy? Since thou art not involved, not impli-
cated, tell me who is."

"Obviously it is the Oracle itself."

Stile was stunned. "The Oracle? But the Oracle has
always helped me and spoken truel"

"Has it?" Translucent's lip curled in a practiced sneer.

And Stile had to wonder. The root of many of his
problems did seem to lie with the Oracle. He had assumed
that mistakes in interpretation or delivery caused the
mischief—but why did the Oracle couch its messages in

102 Juxtaposition

language that so readily lent itself to confusion? The Ora-
cle knew the future; it must therefore also know the effect
of its own words. In some cases, a ready understanding of
a prediction might cause a person to change his course of
action, making the Oracle's message invalid. Since the
Oracle was always correct, some obfuscation became nec-
essary to avoid paradox. Or the message could be couched
as an either-or situation, as in the case of the animalheads.
But why set it up to cause trouble? The animalheads could
have been told, "Let the man on the unicorn pass," and
done as well for themselves as possible. It did seem that
the message had been couched to discriminate against
Stile.

"Why would the Oracle seek to do thee mischief?" the
Lady asked.

"I shall leave thee to ponder that at leisure," the Trans-
lucent Adept said, and departed.

"At leisure—until we starve?" the Lady asked.
"Maybe I'd better transform us," Stile said.
"Nay," the Lady said. "We are not in immediate danger.
Thou canst conjure in food while we await the unicorn's
return."

Stile did not feel easy. For one thing, he could not
afford to wait indefinitely; he had promised to return to
Proton at a specified time, and that time was near. For
another, he did not trust the Translucent Adept to let
things be; the man knew he could not long keep another
Adept captive. He might even now be preparing some
more threatening measure. It would be no easier for him
to devise a way to destroy Stile than it was for Stile to find
a safe escape; they were at an impasse at the moment.
How long would that last?

But he hardly had time to worry before the move came.
Monstrous pincers forged down from above, closing in-
exorably on the net. Each section was six feet in diameter,
rounded, with a homy surface on one side. No physical
way to resist that massi Stile readied his transformation-
spell.

"Wait!" the Lady cried. "That is the giantess!"
Of course! How could he have failed to recognize her

juxtaposition                     103

colossal fingers? Clip had brought the one creature capable
of lifting the net!

The giantess' fingers closed on the net, while Stile and
the Lady herded Hinblue as far to one side as possible,
avoiding the central pinch. The tremendous rocky finger-
nails-caught in the ropes. The hand lifted—and the net
came up. They were hauled up with it, through the water
to the surface, and swung across to land.

Now, too late, it occurred to Stile that he could have
done this himself, conjuring ia sky hook to lift them all
free. Or he might have summoned superpowerful cutting
pincers to sever individual strands. Under the pressures of
the moment, he had not been thinking well. He would
have to school himself to perform better under magical
pressure.

Here, beyond the Translucent Demesnes, Stile's magic
could overcome the enchantment of the net directly. The
strands melted and flowed into the sand, freeing them at
last.

"I thank the giantess," Stile said, his voice booming
through a conjured megaphone.

"I owe thee for my thimble," she boomed back.
'Thank thy friend for showing me the way." She turned
and strode northeast, toward the demesnes of the giants.
She hummed as she went, making a sound like distant
thunder.

Clip was there in natural form, having arrived unobtru-
sively. "I do thank thee, unicorn," Stile said sincerely.
"Again thou hast gotten me out of mischief. I would do
thee some return favor."

Clip shifted to man-form. "My sister Neysa bid me look
after thee in her stead. She loves thee, and I love her. Say
no more. Adept." He shifted back.

Stile said no more. Clip was certainly fulfilling his com-
mission! Most unicorns would not tolerate a human rider
at all and had little use for Adepts. Stile had won the
respect of the Herd Stallion, so was permitted to ride a
unicorn—yet Clip's service was more than that of a mere
steed. No friend could have done more. There would have
to be a repayment of some sort. He would continue to

104 Juxtaposition

ponder the matter in off moments, seeking what was suit-
able.

There was now the matter of the Translucent Adept.
Stile decided, with a certain inner regret, to let that be. He
had intruded on the Translucent Demesnes, and the Adept
had not discriminated against him. Stile had won sufficient
victory by escaping the net. To attack another Adept at
this point would be to initiate trouble, rather than reacting
to it.

He looked ahead. They were on the island of the West
Pole. It was pleasant enough, with deciduous trees scat-
tered across gently rolling pasture. Small flowers bloomed
randomly, and a number of shrubs bore fruit. A person
could live fairly comfortably here without much labor.

The curtain continued west. They followed it—and sud-
denly, three miles in from the beach, they were at the
West Pole. It was marked by a big X on the ground.

Stile looked down at it. 'That's it?" he asked, disap-
pointed.

"Didst thou expect perchance a palace?" the Lady in-
quired with a smile.

"Well, yes, or something spectacular. This X on the
ground—how do we know this is really the spot?"

"Because the curtains intersect here, my love." She
stood on the X and .pointed north-south with her arms.
"Here is the other curtain. It proceeds at right angles."

Stile looked carefully. There it was—another curtain,
like the Erst, crossing at the X. He spelled himself across,
and found himself on a barren elevation of Proton. Holding
his breath, he strode to the east-west curtain and willed
himself across. He was back in Phaze. The two curtains
were similar, except for orientation.

"And from here thou canst sight along them, to see that
they are straight," the Lady said.

Stile stood on the Pole and sighted east. The line was
absolutely straight; all the meanderings they had traveled
now seemed to be distortions of the land of Phaze and the
land of Proton. Interesting perspective!

Curious as to how far this went, he conjured a powerful
telescope, one based on the macron principle, and oriented
on the line again. It went straight for what might be thou-

{uxtaposition                     103

sands of miles, until the focus found the backside of a
standing man. That man was holding an object to his
eye.

"Oh, nol" Stile exclaimed. "That's mel" And he,kicked
up one foot, verifying it. "This line does not even ac-
knowledge the curvature of the planetl"

"Of course not," the Lady said. "Phaze is flat."

"But Phaze has the same geography as Proton—and
Proton is a sphere. How can that be?"

"Phaze is magic; Proton is scientific."

Stile decided to let that wait for further thought. An-
other problem had occurred. "This is a telescope I'm using
—I didn't think—I mean it's a scientific instrument. It
shouldn't work here in the magic frame."

"Methought thou didst know," the Lady said. "The
West Pole is the juxtaposition of frames. Magic and sci-
ence both work, on this spot. That is what makes it worth
visiting."                                        ^

"Juxtaposition," Stile repeated, intrigued. "Could both
selves of a person meet here, then?"

"Methinks they would merge here, and separate again
when they moved away from the Pole, but I know not for
sure."

"Science and magic merging at this particular juncturel
I wonder if this is the way the universe began, with every-
thing working both ways, and somehow the frames began
separating, like cells dividing or surfaces pulling apart, so
that people had to choose one or the other, never both?
Like matter and anti-matter. Except for a few anchorages
like this. This is speciall"

"Aye," she agreed. "Methought thou wouldst like it.
Many impossible tricks of science are possible here."

Stile sighed. "Now we have reached our destination; Our
time is up, our honeymoon over, and I must return to
Proton for a stint of Citizenship."

"Our time is not up," she said. "Merely held in abey-
ance. Our honeymoon will endure as long as we permit.
Conjure me a small residence here, and I will await thy
return."

"But the hostile signals, the dire warnings—suppose
something should happen during mine absence?"

106 juxtaposition

"Methinks the hostility was directed more at thee than
at me. I should be safe enough. But with Clip and Hinblue
to guard me, I shall surely not want for protection."

"Still, I want to be sure," Stile said, pacing a small circle
about the Pole. "Too much has threatened, and thou art
too great a treasure to risk." He pondered. "If the West
Pole permits science, could I set up a holographic pickup
and broadcast unit, to reach me in Proton-frame? Would it
transmit thine image successfully?"

"We can End out," she said.

Stile worked out a spell and conjured a standard Proton
unit of the type used for projections originating outside the
domes. He set it up and got it running; it could handle all
that was visible from this point. Then he conjured an
oxygen mask and crossed into barren Proton farther east,
carrying a conjured receiver. It worked well enough; a
globe formed in air and he looked into it to see the view of
whatever direction he faced. He spun its orientation and
caught the circular panorama as if turning in place at the
West Pole. He halted it in place when he spied the Lady
Blue standing beside the grazing Hinblue.

"I see thee," Stile said, activating the voice-return. This
hand-held unit could not transmit his picture, but that
wasn't necessary.

"I love thee," she returned, smiling. "Thee, thee, thee."

"Thee, thee, thee," he repeated, in the Phaze convention
of unqualified love, feeling warm all over. Then he stepped
back across the curtain agd conjured a tent for privacy.
Clip snorted musically, not looking up from his grazing.

"But thou knowest what thou must do in the other
frame," the Lady reminded him sternly.

Stile sighed. He knew. But for another hour he could
put it from his mind.

And in due course he conjured himself back to his usual
curtain-crossing place and returned to his duties in Proton.

CHAPTER 6

Commitment

Sheen was waiting for him. "How was your honeymoon,
sir?" she inquired with a certain emphasis.

'Trouble with two other Adepts, rescued by a troll and
a giantess. Routine fare."

"Obviously," she agreed wryly. "Are you ready to ap-
prove your new staff, sir? And your temporary economy
residence?"

There was that "sir" again. "I'd better. Sheen."

She guided him to a Citizen transport capsule. It was
ordinary from the outside, but like a spaceship cabin in-
side. Through the port a holograph of moving stars could
be glimpsed. A rotund, balding serf walked up the aisle
and stood at attention, wearing only a tall white hat.

"Speak to him, sir," Sheen murmured.

"Who are you?" Stile asked.

"Sir, I am Cookie, your chef."

"I just happen to be hungry enough to eat a bear,"
Stile said. The recent action in Phaze had taken his mind
from food, causing him to miss a meal.

"Immediately, sir." Cookie disappeared.

Stile blinked. "Oh—he's a holo too."

"Naturally, sir. There is not room in this capsule for a
kitchen. We'll arrive in a few minutes, and he will have
your meal ready."

Another naked serf entered the spaceship. This one was
an attractive older woman. Stile raised an inquiring eye-
brow. "1 am Henriette, your head housemistress, sir," she
said primly.

Stile wondered what a housemistress did, but decided
not to inquire. Sheen would not have hired her without
reason. "Carry on, Henriette," he said, and she vanished.
107

108                    Juxtaposition

Next was a middle-aged man not much larger than Stile
himself. "I am Spade, your gardener, sir."

"Sam Spade?" Stile inquired with a smile.

But the man did not catch the historical-literary allu-
sion. Only a Game specialist would be up on such
minutiae. "Sir, only Spade, the gardener."

"Of course. Spade." Stile made a gesture of dismissal,
and the man vanished.

Next was a voluptuously proportioned young woman
with black tresses flowing across her body to her knees.
"Of her it is said, let the rose hang its head," Stile mur-
mured, conscious that the rhyme would work no magic
here in Proton-frame.

The girl took this as the signal to speak. "I am Dul-
cimer, your entertainer, sir."

Stile glanced at Sheen. "What kind of entertainment do
you suppose I need?"

Sheen was suppressing a smile in the best human fash-
ion. "Duke, show the Citizen your nature."

Dulcimer put both hands to her head, took hold of her
ears, and turned her head sharply sidewise. There was a
click; then the head lifted off her body. "At your service,
sir."

"A robot!" Stile exclaimed. Then, more thoughtfully:

"Are you by chance one of Sheen's friends?"

"I am, sir," the robot head said.

"Put yourself together," Stile told her, and the head was
lowered and twisted back into place. Stile waved her away,
and Dulcimer vanished.

He turned seriously to Sheen. "Do you fhink this is
wise?"

"Sir, I can not always guard you now. A Citizen de-
pends on no single serf. You can use Dulce when I am not
available."

"A machine concubine? Forget it. You know I have no
present use for such things. Not since I married the Lady

Blue."

"I know, sir," she agreed sadly. "Yet you need protec-
tion, for you will be making rivals and perhaps enemies
among Citizens. It would not do for a Citizen to take his
cook or housemaid or gardener to social functions."

Juxtaposition                    109

"But Dulcimer would be okay. Now I understand." He
considered briefly, then decided to get his worst chore out
of the way. "Before we arrive, set up a privacy barrier. I
want to talk to you."

"It is already in place. Others must not know that self-
willed machines associate with you. Sir."

"You can drop the *sir' when privacy is guaranteed,"
he said a trifle sharply. "You were never my inferior,
Sheen."

"I was never your equal, either," she said. "What do
you wish to say to me?"

Stile nerved himself and plunged in. "You know that I
love only the Lady Blue. What went before is history."

"I have no jealousy of the Lady Blue. She is your per-
fect wife."

"She is my perfect woman. Before her, you were that
woman; but I changed when I became the Blue Adept.
The marriage is only a social convention, applying to the
frame of Phaze. Here in Proton I remain single."

"Citizens do not have to marry, not even to designate an
heir. I don't see your problem."

"Yet there are marriages of convenience, even among
Citizens."

"Especially among Citizens. They marry for leverage, or
to pool estates, or to keep a favored serf on Proton beyond
his or her twenty-year tenure. They hardly ever worry
about love or sex or even appearance in that respect."

'Tet there are legal aspects," Stile continued doggedly.
"The spouse of a Citizen has certain prerogatives—"

"Entirely at the pleasure of the Citizen," she said. "The
spouse may be immune to tenure termination or molesta-
tion by other Citizens, but the Citizen can divorce that
spouse merely by entering a note in the computer records.
So it means nothing, unless the spouse is another Citizen."

"It means the spouse is a person, for at least the dura-
tion of the marriage," Stile said.

"A serf is already a person. Marriage to a Citizen
merely enhances status for a time. The main hope of serfs
who marry Citizens is that one of their children will be
designated heir, since such a child shares the bloodline of

110 Juxtaposition

the Citizen. But there is no guarantee. Each Citizen is his
own law."

"Sometimes a Citizen will designate the spouse as heir,"
Stile said.

She shrugged. "All this is true. Stile. But what is the
point?"

"I have it in mind to marry in Proton, and to designate
my wife my heir."

"Oh." She pondered, her computer mind sorting
through the implications. "A marriage of convenience to
protect your estate. Not for love or sex or companionship."

"For all these things, in part," he said.

"What does the Lady Blue think of this?"

"She suggested it. Though she is able to cross the cur-
tain, she has no affinity for this frame, and no legal status
in it. You say you have no jealousy of her; neither does
she have jealousy of you."

"Of me? Of course she doesn'tl I'm a machine."

"Yes. But she regards you as a person. Now, with this
basic understanding, I—" He hesitated.

"You want me to locate a suitable bride of convenience
for you?"

"Not exactly. Sheen, I want you to be that bride."

"Don't be silly. Stile. I'm a robot. You know that."

"I see I have to do it the hard way." Stile got out of his
comfortable chair. She started to rise, but he gestured her
to remain seated.

Stile knelt before her, taking her hand. "Lady Sheen, I
ask your hand in marriage."

"I shouldn't be sensitive to humor of this sort," she said.
"But I must say I didn't expect it of you."

"Humor, helll Will you marry me?"

Machines were not readily surprised, but she was pro-
grammed to react in human fashion. She paled. "You
can't be serious!"

"I am serious, and my knee is getting uncomfortable.
Will you answer me?"

"Stile, this is impossible! I'm—"

"I know what you are. You always bring it up when
you're upset. I am a Citizen. I can do as I wish. I can
marry whom I choose, for what reason I choose."

Juxtaposition                     111

She stared at him. "You are serious! But the moment
you tried to register me as—as—they would know my
nature. They would destroy me."

"They would have to destroy me Erst. Answer."

"Stile, why are you doing this? The mischief—"

"I see I must answer you, since you will not answer me.
If I many you, you will be the wife of a Citizen. By
definition, a person. By extension, others of your type may
then be considered persons. It is a wedge, a lever for
recognition of the self-willed machines as serfs. This is a
service I can do for them."

"It really is convenience," she said. "Using me to help
my friends forward their case for recognition as people."

"Which would be even more potent if something put me
out of the scene prematurely and thrust the onus of Citi-
zenship on you."

'"True," she said.

'Is that my answer? Does true equate to yes?"

"No!" she snapped, jumping up. "I don't want your
title, I want your love!"

Stile got off his knee silently. His love was one thing he
could not offer her.

"In fact, I don't want your convenience," she continued,
working up some unrobotic temper. "I don't want the
appearance without the reality. I don't want to be used."

"I don't propose to use you—"

"I'm not talking about sex!" she screamed. "I would be
happy for that! It's being used as a lever I object to."

"I'm sorry. I thought it was a good idea."

"You in your flesh-male arrogancel To set me up as a
mock wife to be a lever, the simplistic machine I am! You
thought because I love you I'll do anything you want.
After all, what pride can a mere machine have?"

What had he walked into? Stile brought out his holo
receiver and called the Lady Blue.

The picture-globe formed. Stile turned it about until the
Lady Blue came into view. She was brushing down Hin-
blue. "Lady," he said.

She looked up. "My Lord!"

Sheen paused in her pacing. "You're in touch with her?"

"Aye, Lady Sheen," the Lady Blue answered, recogniz-

112 Juxtaposition

ing her voice. "And easy it is to understand the nature of
thy concern. I confess I put my Lord up to it."

"I should have known," Sheen said, bemused. "But this
is a cynical thing. Lady."

"Aye, Lady. It is a cruel sacrifice for thee."

'That's not the point. Lady. The sheer mischief—"

"I apologize for putting thee in an untenable position,
Lady Sheen. Thou hast every right to reject it." She gave
Hinblue another stroke, then addressed Stile. "My Lord, I
thought not of her feeling, only of her merit. I wanted her
as my sister in that frame, and that was selfish. Let her be.
I love thee." She returned to the horse, dismissing him.

Stile turned off the holo. "I guess that covers it. Sheen."
He felt embarrassed and awkward. "If it's any comfort, I
felt about the same as you, when she broached the notion.
I do care for you; I always did. I just can't honestly call it
love."

"I accept," Sheen said.

"You are generous to accept my apology. I wish I had
not put you through this."

"Not the apology. The proposal."

"The—?"

"Remember way back when, you proposed marriage?"

Stile was amazed. "I—"

"Yes, that proposal. If you had the circuitry of a robot,
you'd remember these details more readily. Perhaps if you
practiced mnemonic devices—"

"But why? You made such a good case against—"

"She wants it," she said simply.

That he could understand. He had proposed to Sheen
because the Lady Blue wanted it; she had accepted for the
same reason. Now they just had to hope it was a good
idea.

The capsule had come to a halt, the portholes showing a
landing at a spaceport. Sheen keyed the door open. Stile
gaped.

Outside lay the Blue Demesnes.

No, of course it was the Proton equivalent, on (he same
geographic site. Merely one of numerous examples of
parallelism of frames. The castle and grounds looked the

juxtaposition                    113

same as in Phaze, but there was no magic. Horses grazed
and dogs ranged, not unicorns and werewolves. Still, it
moved him.

"After the Lady Bluette died, her Employer restored the
property and put it on the market," Sheen explained. "It
was at a bargain price. I thought you'd like it."

"I do." Stile stared at it a moment longer. "But it's
strange here."

"No Lady Blue," she said.

"It will be yours now."

She was silent. Had he said the wrong thing? Well,
either it would work out or it wouldn't.

His chef had his meal waiting: genuine imported roast
of bear. Stile made a mental note not to speak figuratively;

as a Citizen, he was too apt to be taken literally. He had
said he could eat a bear; now he had to do it.

Actually, it wasn't bad. The chef did know his business.
Sheen had hired people of genuine competence.

"And now for your estate adviser," Sheen said as Stile
chomped somewhat diffidently. "You have some elegant
financial maneuvering ahead."

"I'd rather master the rules of the game and lay it
myself."

"This adviser is one of my friends."

Oh. That was a different matter.

The adviser turned out to be an old male serf, wrinkled,
white-haired, and elegant. Stile would not have known him
for a robot, had Sheen not informed him. It was evident
that the self-willed machines had profited from what Sheen
had learned in the course of her association with Stile;

only time, expert observation, or direct physical examina-
tion betrayed his current associates.

Stile nodded affirmatively to the serf, and the man re-
ported: "Sir, I am Mellon, your financial accountant."

"Mellon, eh?" Stile repeated. "As in Rockefeller, Car-
negie, and Du Font?"

The serf smiled. "Yes, sir."

"You're that good with money?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then why are you here as a serf, instead of making
your fortune elsewhere in the universe?" Stile knew the

114                    Juxtaposition

robot had no future away from Proton, but a real serf
would, and the cover story had to be good.

"Sir, I have already made my fortune elsewhere," Md-
Ion said. "I am as rich as a Citizen. But here on Proton the
dynamics of wealth are most pronounced; the leverage of
economics is exerted most openly. Only here can I experi-
ence the joy of renewed challenge, failure, and success.
When my tenure expires, I shall return to my comfortable
galactic estate and write my memoirs of the Proton experi-
ence."

Stile was impressed. This was a feasible rationale. It
would explain the man's computerized competence. Stile
might even have to stave off efforts by other Citizens to
hire Mellon away. Except that since no real Mellon ex-
isted, any verification of his background would reveal—

"I am cast in the likeness of an actual person, sir,"
Mellon said, reading Stile's expression. "The proceeds of
my memoirs will go to him, in recompense for the use of
his credentials."

The machines had figured it all out! "Well, I hope you
are not disappointed in the experience you have managing
my estate. I don't even know its extent, but I'm trusting
you to multiply it for me rapidly."

"I shall do so, sir. I must ask that you follow my advice
in particulars with alacrity. There are likely to be difficult
moments, but there is an eighty-five percent probability of
accomplishing our objective."

Mellon certainly seemed sure of himself! The machines
had to have secrets that could be exploited for tremendous
leverage. Stile suspected he should leave it alone, but his
curiosity governed. "How do you propose to make me
rich, even by Proton standards? Surely my section of the
Protonite mines can only produce so much."

"By wagering, sir. You will be better informed than
your opponents."

Because of the immense body of information accessible
to the sapient machines. But it would be made to seem like
human instinct and luck. "No."

"Sir?"

"To wager when one has an illicit advantage is not
equitable. I do not care to make my fortune that way."

Juxtaposition                     115

"He's like that, Mel," Sheen said smugly.

"Sir, without that advantage, the odds become prohibi-
tive."

"I have surmounted prohibitive odds before. I shall not
compromise my standards now. Presumably you will be
able to perform moderately well while limited to ethical
means."

"Yes, sir," Mellon said grimly.

Stile completed his uncomfortable repast of bear steak.
"Then let's get to it now. I am not used to wealth. I fear
this will be a chore for me. I want to get that chore out of
the way and return to—my private retreat." Even among
his staff, he was not inclined to talk too freely of Fhaze.
"But first—Sheen?"

"Sir," Sheen said immediately.

"By what mechanism do I promulgate my engagement
to you?"

"Application must be made to the Records Computer,
sir. A Citizen hearing will be arranged."

"And?"

"That is all, sir. Marriages, births, designations of heirs,
changes in estate holdings—all are merely a matter of
accurate record. The hearing is a formality, to make sure
there is no foul play or confusion."

"No ceremony? Blood tests? Waiting periods?"

"These are available if you wish them, sir. But they are
not required for Citizens and are irrelevant for robots. The
entry in the record is all that is mandatory."

"Well, let's do this right. Let's set a date for a formal,
medieval. Earth-style nuptial, and invite the public."

"What date, sir?"

Stile considered. "There may be some mischief here.
Let's give it time to clear. Set the date for two months
hence, at which time you will become my wife and heir.
Get yourself a pretty wedding outfit."

Mellon coughed. "Sir, may I comment?"

"Comment," Stile agreed.

"The Records Computer will know Sheen is not a legal
person. It will advise the members of the Citizen panel.
This will not interfere with the marriage, for a Citizen may

116 Juxtaposition

do what pleases him; he may marry a toad if he wants.
But the designation of a nonperson as heir to Citizenship
will complicate your own activities. If you could hold that
aspect in abeyance—"

"That would be a lie," Stile said. "I intend to name
her heir, and I want no deception about it." Yet he won-
dered at his own motive, since this was more than the
Lady Blue had suggested. Why make a larger issue of it?
And he answered himself; because he felt guilty about not
being able to give Sheen his love, so he was giving her his
position instead.

"Yes, sir," Mellon said submissively.

"Sir, he is correct," Sheen said. "If you bring this mis-
chief on yourself prematurely—"

"I will not abuse my word," Stile said firmly. "The truth
shall be known."

"Sir, I fear you will imperil yourself and us," she said.
"Rather than permit that, I shall decline to—"

"Do you want me to call the Lady Blue again?"

Sheen hesitated. "No, sir."

So he had bluffed her outi "How do I file my entry with
the Records Computer?"

"Sir, I can activate its receptor—"

"Do so."

She touched a button on the wall. "Records, sir," a wall
speaker said.

"I, Stile, Citizen, hereby announce my betrothal to the
Lady Sheen. I will marry her two months hence in public
ceremony, and designate her to become my heir to Citi-
zenship effective that date. Any questions?"

"Sir, are you aware that Sheen is a robot?" the com-
puter asked.

"I am aware."

"If you designate a nonperson heir, your estate will, on
your demise or abdication, revert to the common pool,
sir."

"I challenge that," Stile said. "I want her to inherit."

"Then a special hearing will be necessary, sir."

"We already have a hearing. Juxtapose them. Schedule
it at your earliest convenience."

"Yes, sir." The Records Computer disconnected.

Juxtaposition

117

"Now you have done it, sir," Sheen murmured. "You
and your unstable living human temper."

"We'll see. Let's get to the next event."

They entered the capsule again, and Sheen programmed
their destination. The smooth motion commenced. Stile
paid attention to none of this; he was already orienting on
the wagering to come, much as he would for a Game of
the Tourney. He was not sure he had really left the chal-
lenge ladder; perhaps- he had merely achieved a new pla-
teau for a new series of games.

"To wager—what are my present resources?" he asked
Mellon.

"The initial estate of a Citizen is set at one kilogram of
Protonite, sir," Mellon said. "Serfs do not deal in money,
normally, so there is little way to equate this with what
you have known."

"I know that a single ounce of Protonite is supposed to
be worth the entire twenty-year tenure of the average
serf," Stile said.

"Yes, traditionally. Actually, this fluctuates as the vari-
ables of demand and technology change the need, though
the Proton Council regulates the supply to keep the price
fairly stable, much as the cartels of the galaxy have tradi-
tionally regulated the supplies of foregoing fuels—coal,
oil, uranium, and such."

"Until supplies ran short," Stile said. "Or until technol-
ogy obviated the need. Efficient utilization of starlight, and
hydrogen fusion—-these became virtually limitless re-
sources."

"Indeed, sir. But starlight and fusion both require
enormous initial capital investment. Though Protonite is
theoretically limited, it is so potent that it has become the
fuel of choice for interstellar travel. Its value more closely
resembles that of bullion gold than that of bygone oil."

"Gold," Stile said. "I have played with that in my his-
torical researches. I have a fair notion of its value, as
measured in archaic ounces."

"Then set one gram of Protonite as equivalent to four
hundred troy ounces of gold, sir. One kilogram—"

"Four hundred thousand ounces of gold!" Stile finished,
amazed despite himself.

118 Juxtaposition

"Enough to hire a thousand serfs for full tenure, sir,"
Mellon said. "A fortune equivalent to that of many of the
historically wealthy persons of Earth. That is your mini-
mum share of Citizenship; wealthy Citizens control the
equivalent of as much as a ton of Protonite, so are richer
than any historical figure."

"I see that," Stile agreed, somewhat awed. He had
known Citizens were exceedingly rich, but still had under-
estimated the case. "And I must become one of those
wealthy ones?"

"You must become the wealthiest Citizen, sir," Mellon
agreed. "Only then can you be reasonably secure against
the forces that may be brought to bear. Our target is two
metric tons of Protonite."

"That's two thousand kilograms!" Stile exclaimed.

"Precisely, sir. There have been wealthier Citizens in the
past, but at present none go beyond this level. Only ex-
traordinary expertise can bring you to this."

"Expertise, yes; illicit information, no."

"Yes, sir."

"And how much of my single, insignificant kilogram
may I employ for gambling?"

"Three quarters of it, sir. You must, by Proton custom
that has the force of law, maintain a floor of two hundred
and fifty grams for normal household use."

"Some householdl That's a hundred thousand ounces of
gold!"

'True, sir. No Citizen is poor by galactic standards."

"I seem to remember Sheen telling me that no Citizen
could get more than two years' income in arrears."

"That is an optional guideline for the conservative."

"I see. But I can't afford to be conservative, can I? And
if I gamble and lose, so I'm stuck at the floor level—then
what?"

"Your share is not a literal kilogram, sir, but rather the
equivalent in continuing production from the Protonite
mines. In time—perhaps a year—yon will have an income
of ten to twenty additional grams. Enough to maintain a
modest estate without depleting your principal."

"Oh, I wouldn't want to deplete my principal," Stile

Juxtaposition                     119

said, feeling giddy. Even a Citizen's small change vastly
exceeded his expectation. "Still, to build a stake of seven
hundred and fifty grams up to an estate of two thousand
kilograms—that will take rapid doubling and redoubling."

"Certainly, sir. And we shall not be risking all of the
discretionary funds. Reverses are to be expected. I recom-
mend an initial limit of one hundred grams per wager."

"And your recommendation is my law."

"Yes, sir, in this respect Except—"

"Except that I wfll handle the substance of the wagers
myself, drawing on none of your computer information. I
presume you fed this makes me likely to rail."

"Yes, sir," Mellon said unhappily. "I have considerable
strategic resource, were it permissible for use."

"Were it not the way I am, your kind would not have
trusted me to keep their secret."

"Yes, sir." But considerable disapproval was conveyed
in that acquiescence.

"Very well, let's review this matter. You have the entire
information bank of the planetary computer network
available to you. The average wagering Citizen does not.
Would you consider it fair play for us to use this? I submit
that it represents an unfair advantage, and to use it would
be dishonest."

"Citizens have very few restrictions, sir. They may draw
on any available facilities. I think it likely that some will
seek to take advantage of your inexperience. Turnabout
may be considered fair play."

"Very well. If I encounter a Citizen who is trying to
take unfair advantage. 111 draw on your information to
turn the tables. But 111 balk at anything I deem to be
unethical. I will cheat only the cheaters."

"Understood, sir. It would be unwise to seem to follow
the advice of a serf too slavishly."

Evidently the issue of personal integrity still eluded the
robot. "Yes. A Citizen must keep up arrogant appear-
ances."

Now Sheen, who had remained scrupulously clear of
this discussion, rejoined it. "I am sure you will have no
difficulty, sir."

120 juxtaposition

She was a machine, but she was programmed for
human emotion. How much did she resent the use he was
making of her?

The event they attended turned out to be a routine
Citizens' ball. Sheen and Mellon, as favored servitors, were
permitted to accompany Stfle, but they kept subserviently
behind him. At the entrance they outfitted Stfle with a
suitable costume for the occasion: a seemingly cumber-
some ancient spacesuit, puffed out around the limbs with
huge joints at the elbows and knees, and a translucent
helmet bubble. Actually, the material was very light and
did not hamper movement at all.

They entered the ballroom—and Stfle was amazed. It
was outer space in miniature. Stars and planets, somewhat
out of scale; comets and nebulae and meteors and dust
clouds. The motif was not remarkable, but the execution
was spectacular. The stars were light without substance,
holographically projected, but they looked so real he was
fearful of getting burned if he floated too near. For he was
floating, in effect, on the invisible floor; the soles of his
space boots were padded, so that his footsteps made no
sound.

Citizens in assorted varieties of spacesuits floated in
groups, their serf-servitors like satellites. One spotted him
and moved across. It was the Rifleman. "I see you are
mixing in, Stfle. Excellent. Let me introduce you to key
figures. What is your preference? Romance, camaraderie,
or mischief?"

"Mischief," Stfle said, grateful for the man's help. "I
want to make some wagers."

"Oh, that kindl It's the gamesmanship in your blood. I
know the feeling well. But we have some high rollers here;

they'll strip you down to your minimum estate in short
order, if you let them. You can never bet all your wealth,
you know; computer won't allow any Citizen to wipe out.
Bad for the image."

"I understand. I have a competent monetary adviser."

"You will need him. I warn you. Stile, there are barra-
cuda in these waters. Best to play penny ante untfl you get
to know them."

Juxtaposition                     121

By the same token, though, the barracuda would get to
know him—and his adviser. That would not do. He
needed to score rapidly, before others grew wary. "What is
considered penny ante here?"

"One gram of Protonite."

"That was all I was worth a few days ago."

The Rifleman smiled. "I, too, in my day. Times change,
Citizen. This is a whole new world."

"I hope not to do anything foolish before I acclimatize."

"Oh, by all means do be foolish," the Rifleman said
encouragingly. "It is expected of all new Citizens. You are
the novelty of the day; enjoy it whfle you can."

All this time the Rifleman had been guiding Stile across
the miniature galaxy. Now they came to a group of space-
suited Citizens hovering near a large dark nebula. The men
were rotund and unhandsome; rich living had shaped them
to porcine contours that even the ballooning suits could
not ameliorate. This disgusted Stfle; he knew that they
could easily have kept their weight down by consuming
diet food that tasted identical to the calorific food, or by
having reductive treatments. Apparently they just didn't
care about appearance.

But the two women were a striking contrast. One was
an hourglass, her breasts like pink melons, her waist so
tiny Stfle knew that surgery had reduced it, her hips re-
surging enormously, tapering into very large but well-
contoured legs. Stfle found this exaggeration of female
traits unpleasant, but even so, it had its impact upon him.
Her breasts swelled like the tides of an ocean as she
breathed, and her hips shifted elevation precipitously as
she walked. Her suit was only remotely related to space;

most of it was transparent, and much of the front was
mere netting. It seemed to Stfle that in real space those
enormous mammaries would detach explosively and fly
outward like the rings of gas and dust from old super-
novae. But she had a pretty face, almost elfin; surely the
handiwork of a fine plastic surgeon.

The other woman was decorously garbed in an opaque
cloth-type suit that covered every portion of her body. Her
head was encased in a translucent bubble that shadowed

122

Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

123

her face and lent enticing mystery to her expression. She
seemed almost too young to be a Citizen—but of course
there was no age limit.

The Rifleman introduced the whole group, but the
names of the men bounced off Stile's awareness like rain-
water. Only the two women registered consciously; he had
never before heard the name of a female Citizen, and it
affected him with an almost erotic force. ". .. Fulca, with
the fulsome figure," the Rifleman was concluding. "And
Merle, known to her illustrious enemies as the Blackbird."

Illustrious enemies? Blackbird? If this were not mere
posturing, this was a Citizen to be wary of.

The two women nodded as their names were spoken.
"You're the new franchise, aren't you?" Fulca inquired.

"Yes, sir," Stile said, then visibly bit his tongue. Both
women smiled.

"Stile would like to wager," the Rifleman said. "He's a
Gamesman, you know, with an eye to pulchritude."

The male Citizens stood back, curious but not partici-
pating, as if more intrigued by the manner in which the
females would handle this upstart than by the prospect of
making some profit. "Anything," Fulca agreed. "Choose
your mode, bantam."

There was that ubiquitous reference to his size. He
would probably never be free of such disparagement. No
sense in letting it rattle him. He had what he wanted—
someone to wager with.

Stile's imagination suddenly deserted him. "Uh, small,
to start. Very small. And simple."

Her glance traversed him merrily. "For a small, simple
man. Agreed."

Was that another cut at him? Probably not; it was evi-
dent that Citizens treated each other very casually. What
did they have to prove? They were all elite. Or maybe this
was part of his initiation. The watching males gave no
sign.

"Uh, scissors-paper-stone?" Stile asked, casting about
for something suitable and drawing no inspiration from
the environment. Without the Game's preliminary grid, he
lacked notions.

"Ah, a noncontact game," she said as if surprised. Now

one of the watching males nodded at another, as if the two
had made a bet on the matter that had now been decided.
So that was the nature of their interest—to wager on
Stile's performance with the voluptuous woman. No doubt
many men sought to get close to her on one pretext or
another. This actually encouraged Stile; he was beginning
to grasp the situation. "Small and simple," he repeated.

"Shall we say one gram, doubled each round, seven
rounds?" Fulca suggested.

Stile glanced at Mellon, who made an almost perceptible
nod of assent. The final bet would fall within the limita-
tion, though the total amount of the series would not.
These Citizens were indeed a fast crowdl Again one of the
males nodded, having a point decided—what level Stile
was playing at.

"May I call the throws?" the Rifleman asked. "On the
count of two, spaced one second; late throw means de-
fault, which Merle will call. For one gram of Protonite:

on your mark, one—two."

Stile, caught off-guard by this ready procedure, put out
his forked fingers a shade late. Fulca was there with a flat
hand. "Default," Merle said, her voice soft, like dusk wind
in pines.

"Agreed," Stile said, embarrassed. He had made the
winning throw—too late. Some beginning; he had already
thrown away the twenty-year ransom of one serf.

"For two grams," the Rifleman said. "One—two."

This time Stile was on time, with scissors again. Fulca
also showed scissors. "No decision," Merle breathed.

Stile marveled that it could really be this simple. He had
thought of Citizens as a class apart, devoted to pursuits
beyond the comprehension of mere serfs. But in fact Citi-
zens were serflike in their entertainment—or so it seemed
so far.

The Rifleman continued without pause. "Balance of one
gram to Fulca. For four grams: one—two."

Stile's mind was racing as he wanned to the game. The-
oretically random, these combinations were actually not
Each person was trying to figure the strategy of the other.
Stile himself was very good at analyzing patterns and
moods; he did it almost instinctively. The first throw had




124

juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

125

been random; the normal course, for an inexperienced
person, would be to go on the next throw to whatever
choice had won before. Thus Fulca had gone from paper
to scissors. Stile, testing, had held dm. Did he have the
pattern solved? If so, Fulca would go next to the stone. So
he would match that, verifying. The early bets were for
analyzing; the later ones counted. Even as this flashed
through his mind, his hand was flinging out the closed
fist.

Fulca matched his stone. "No decision," Merle said. It
seemed they did not play these over, but just continued the
series.

"For eight grams: one—two."

This time Stile went for the win. He expected Fulca to
go for paper, to wrap the last throw's stone. So he threw
scissors again—and won.

"Scissors cuts paper; Stile wins," Merle announced.

"Balance of seven games to Stile," the Rifleman said.
"For sixteen grams: one—two."

Would the hourglass lady Citizen be foolish enough to
go for stone again, fighting the last war too late? Or would
she stick with paper, expecting him to go for stone? Stile
decided to play her for the fool. He threw out the flat
hand. And won.

"Paper wraps stone; Stile," Merle said.

"Balance of twenty-three grams to Stile," the Rifleman
said. "I warned you girls he was a Gamesman, like me. He
can play. For thirty-two grams: one—two."

Stile continued the fool-play, throwing out the closed
fist. Fulca threw the forked fingers. She winced as she saw
the combination.

"Stone crushes scissors. Stile wins." Merle smiled within
her dusky helmet. Evidently these people enjoyed a good
challenge.

"You beat me with the ones I lose withi" Fulca ex-
claimed.

That was another way of looking at it. He had cut her
paper, then shifted to paper and wrapped her stone, then
had his stone crush her scissors. The losing throws became
the winners of the next throw. "Beginner's luck," Stile said
apologetically.

One of the males snorted, "His mind is on the wager,
not her body," he murmured.

"Balance of fifty-five grams to Stile," the Rifleman said.
"For sixty-four grams: one—two."

Fulca had caught on to his pattern; had she the wit to
take advantage of it? This single throw could reverse the
entire game. Stile thought she would not leam quickly
enough, so he threw scissors, trusting her to throw paper.
She did.

"Scissors cuts paper. Stile wins," Merle said.

"He sure cut your paperi" the male Citizen remarked to
Fulca with satisfaction. He had evidently won his private
bet on the outcome of this contest.

"Balance of one hundred nineteen grams to Stile. End
of series," the Rifleman said. "So entered in the credit
record; Stile has increased his Citizen's stake by more than
ten percent, fleecing his first ewe. Instant analysis: he lost
one, drew two, and won four. Was this luck or skill?"

"Skill," Merle said. "He is a master Gamesman—as is
unsurprising."

Fulca shrugged, and her torso undulated in vertical
stages. "There are other games."

"Uh-uh, dear," the Rifleman said with a reproving
smile. "You had your crack at him and lost, as I did in the
Tourney. If you want to seduce him, you'll have to wait
your next turn. Now he enters the second round."

"Second round?" Stile asked.

This time all the male Citizens chuckled. Merle tapped
herself lightly between her muted breasts. "Do you care to
try your skill with me, serf-Citizen?"

"I do still have the urge," Stile said, catching Mellon's
affirmative nod. But he felt uneasy; he now perceived that
Merle was not nearly as young as she had first seemed. In
fact, she was somewhat older than he, and her manner was
that of a completely self-assured person. She was probably
a power among Citizens; one of the barracuda he had been
warned against. But he would have to tackle this kind
some time.

"Then let us play a hand of poker," she said.

The serfs hastily brought a pack of playing cards, poker
chips, an opaque table, and chairs. The Rifleman took




126 Juxtaposition

the cards, spread them out, and pronounced them fit to
play with; Stile believed him. No one got through the
Tourney without being expert with cards. Why should
Citizens cheat? They needed neither money nor fame,
and cheating would destroy the natural suspense of
gambling.

But Stile was nervous about this game. Poker players
were a breed apart, and a Citizen poker player whose
facial features were shrouded by a translucent helmet
could be more of a challenge than Stile could handle at the
moment. Yet Stile was good at poker, as he was in most
games; he certainly should have a fighting chance, even
against an expert—if he didn't run afoul of his betting
limit. Limits could be devastating in poker.

"Merle has chosen the game," the Rifleman said. "Stile
may choose the rules."

"Standard fifty-two-card pack, no wild cards, standard
wider galaxy hands in force, betting—"

"Sorry, Stile," the Rifleman interjected. "You may not
dictate the pattern of betting. That choice reverts to her,
by Citizen custom."

"Of course I will honor Citizen custom," Stile said. "But
I have hired a serf to supervise my estate, and he wants me
to stay clear of large bets until I know my way around. So
I might have to renege on the game, if—"

"A sensible precaution," Merle said. "Seat your serf to
the side; you may consult with him while betting."

"That is gracious of you. Merle," Stile said, forcing
himself to speak her name, though his lifetime of serf
conditioning screamed against it. "Please, in compensa-
tion, name the variant you prefer."

"Certainly, Stile. Are you familiar with Lovers' Quar-
rel?"

Oops. "I do not know that variant," Stile admitted.

"It is a variety of Draw. Each player must draw from
the hand of the other, one card at a time, which hand is
replenished by the dealer. Betting occurs after each draw,
until one player stands pat."

Some variant! This had the double stress of involuntary
loss of cards from one's hand, and the opponent's knowl-
edge of an increasing portion of that hand. At some point




Juxtaposition

127

they both should know what each had—but that would
not necessarily make betting easier.

They took seats at the table, the Rifleman serving as
dealer. Stile glanced at the knot of spectators. The males
watched with poker faces, obviously intent on the proceed-
ings. Mellon and Sheen stood impassively, but Stile knew
that Sheen, at least, was controlling her emotional cir-
cuitry with difficulty. She loved him and wanted to protect
him, and here she could not. This was also outside Mel-
lon's bailiwick; there was no way for him to draw on
computer information to give Stile an advantage, and that
was the way Stile preferred it. This was an honest game.

The Rifleman dealt five cards to each. Stile picked up
his hand, holding it together so that only the bottom card
showed, and that was concealed from all external view by
his casually cupped hands. He riffled once through the
comers, his trained eye photographing the hand and put-
ting it mentally in order: ace of spades, 10 of hearts, 10 of
diamonds, 4 of dubs, 2 of clubs. A pair of tens. That was
not much; in a two-player game, the odds were marginally
in favor of this being high, but he would have similar odds
on the flip of a coin. He did not want to bet on this.

"The lady may draw first," the Rifleman said.

"Thank you. Rife," Merle said. She discarded one card
face down. "I will take your center card. Stile, if you
please."

Stile spread his hand without looking and lifted out the
center card. It was the 10 of diamonds. There went his
pair already!

The Rifleman dealt Stile a replacement card. It was the
6 of hearts. Now he had only ace-high, a likely loser.

"One ounce," she said. The Rifleman slid a white poker
chip across to her, and she touched it into the center of
the table.

So that was the unit of currency—safely penny-ante
after all. Relieved, Stile discarded his 10 of hearts, to keep
his opponent from getting it and having a pair, and asked
for Merle's left-end card, which in a conventional arrange-
ment might be her high one. Of course it wasn't; she had
not arranged her cards physically, either. Too much could
be telegraphed that way. It was the jack of dubs.

128 Juxtaposition

Now he had ace of spades, 6 of hearts, jack of dubs, 4
of clubs and 2 of dubs. Perhaps three legs on a flush, if he
didn't lose his dubs to Merle's drawings.

But he had to call, raise, or drop. He was unwilling to
quit so early, so he called, contributing one white chip.

Merle discarded another, and drew his ace. She was
having uncanny luck in destroying his hand! Then she
added a red chip to the pot. She was raising the ante—five
more grams.

The Rifleman passed Stile another replacement card. It
was the king of dubs. Now Stile had four clubs—almost a
flush. A full flush would very likely win the pot; only one
hand in 200 was a flush. But by the same token, flushes
were hard to come by. Merle would have four chances in
five to steal away one of his clubs on her next turn. Should
he call or fold?

He looked at Mellon. The serf nodded affirmatively,
approving the bet. So Stile discarded the 6 of hearts, drew
another card from Merle—and got the ace of spades back.
Disappointed, he matched the red chip.

Merle frowned faintly within her helmet, and Stile was
frustrated again, unable to gauge her true mood. With an
unfamiliar game variant and an unfamiliar opponent, he
could exercise little of his natural skill. A person's eyes
could tell a lot; if the pupils widened, the hand was posi-
tive. But her pupils were shadowed by that translucency.

She took another card: his king of clubs. He got an 8 of
spades from the pack. Already his promised flush was fad-
ing, as he had feared. His hand still amounted to nothing.

Merle put in a blue chip. Another ten grams! That
brought her total up to sixteen grams of Protonite. At the
rate she was raising the ante, he could not afford to let this
game continue too long. But he would surely lose if he
stood pat now; she must have amassed at least one pair.
He wanted to make a good showing, so that other Citizens
would want to make wagers with him.

Stile decided to keep trying for the flush. Therefore he
discarded his ace of spades, reckoning it too risky to hold
for her possible reacquisition, and drew from Merle—his
original 10 of diamonds. No good to him at all, at this
stage, since he had discarded his matching 10 before.

r

Juxtaposition                     129

Again he matched her bet, though he thought it would
have been smarter to drop. She probably had ten times as
much wealth to gamble with as he did. If Mdlon knew
how week Stile's hand was, the serf would hardly have
tolerated this bet.

Merle took his jack of dubs, further decimating his
flush. And she put five more blue chips into the pot. Sixty-
six grams total: she surely had a good hand nowl

Stile accepted the replacement card: the 6 of spades.
Now his hand was the 8 and 6 of spades, 10 of diamonds,
and 4 and 2 of dubs. No pairs, no flush, no high card—
and a monstrous ante racing him if he wanted to keep
playing.

. Then something dicked. He had almost missed the for-
est for the trees!

"I stand pat on this hand," Stile announced. "Adviser,
may I bet my limit?"

Mellon agreed reluctantly. Stile put eight blue chips and
four white ones into the pot, bringing his total to one
hundred grams. Now it was Merle's turn to call or fold;

she could not raise during his turn. Would she be bluffed
out?

She called, putting in another thirty-four grams. She
laid down her hand, face up. "Blaze," she said. "Two
kings, two queens, one jack."

That meant she had to have had one pair last round,
perhaps two pairs, beating him. She had waited until she
had what she wanted: a pat hand, all court cards. She had
played with nerve.

But Stile had beaten her. "Skip straight," he said, hying
it out. "Ten-high." There it was: 10-8-6-4-2. This hand
was not as strong as a straight, but was stronger than any of
the other hands from three of a kind down.

"Very nice. Stile," she agreed. "The pot is yours." She
made a little gesture of parting and walked away.

"He took her," one of the male Citizens said. "That's
one kflo for me." Another nodded glumly.

"Very nice indeed," the Rifleman said. "You have added
another hundred to your estate. It is so recorded."

A total of 219 grams of Protonite added to his original
thousand—in the course of just two supposedly penny-

130                    juxtaposition

juxtaposition

ante games. But Stile knew he could just as readily lose it
again.

Mellon approached as the group of Citizens dispersed.
"Sir, you must desist now."

"I'll be glad to. But what is the reason? I thought you
would stop me from betting before."

"This is the bait, sir. Now the serious bettors will seek
you out."

The serious bettors. Of course. Stile had> as it were,
dipped his toe. He needed to announce himself, so that
he could step into the real action, where the upper limit
would rise. Obviously a gain of 219 grams was statistically
insignificant, compared with the 2000 kilograms that was
his target level. He had won only one ten-thousandth of
his stake. This could be as difficult a climb as it had been
through the levels of the Tourney.

Yet Mellon was not concerned about the luck of indi-
vidual wagers. He had a certain program of challenge
planned. His limit on Stile's initial betting had been merely
to prevent Stile from losing his stake in the course of
making himself known to the key wagering clientele.

"Did I hear correctly?" Stile asked the Rifleman. "Did
one of the spectators bet a full kilogram of Protonite on
the outcome of my game with Merle?"

"He did," the Rifleman agreed. "Citizens bet on any-
thing."

"Ten times what I bet—and he wasn't even playing!"

The Rifleman smiled. "That's the way it is. Your adviser
protected you from getting into that level too soon, Come
on—there's more than wagering to get into."

Stile allowed the Rifleman to show him around some
more. There were different levels and slants and curves to
the invisible floor, with refreshments on one tier, dancing
on another, and conversation on a third. Coupled with the
ubiquitous holographic astronomy, the effect was potent.
This was a wonderland, as impressive in its lavish expense
as in its execution. Yet the Citizens, long used to this sort
of thing, ignored the setting and socialized among them-
selves.

"You do get accustomed to it," the Rifleman said, divin-

juxtaposition                     131

ing Stile's thoughts. "This is merely a standard social oc-
casion, a kind of Citizen concourse, where any can come
for idle entertainment and socializing on an amicable
plane. All comforts and amusements are available at every
Citizen's private residence, but they get bored. Of course
they have holo contact, but you can't actually touch a
holo, or push it aside or make love to it."

"You say they," Stile observed.

"I'm still a serf at heart. You'll be the same. The Citi-
zens do not discriminate against our kind—to do so would
be to dishonor their system—but we discriminate against
ourselves, internally. We react to what is beneath their
notice. Look there, for instance." He gestured upward.

Stile looked. Above them was a transparent spaceship,
inside which Citizens were dancing. The men wore archaic
black tailed-coat costumes, the women white blouses and
slippers and voluminous skirts. From this nether vantage
he could see right up their prettily moving legs, under their
skirts where the white bloomers took over. Stile had gotten
used to nakedness in Proton and to clothing in Phaze, but
this halfway vision was intensely erotic for him. He did
have some acclimatizing to do, lest he embarrass himself.

Again the Rifleman was with him in spirit. "Yet we see
excellent distaff flesh all about us, unconcealed," he
pointed out, indicating Sheen, who remained respectfully
behind. Stile glanced back. Sheen was indeed the perfect
figure of a young woman, with lovely facial features, fine
large, upstanding breasts, and torso and legs that could
hardly be improved upon. In terms of appearance she was
stunning, far prettier than the exaggerated lady Citizen
Fulca—yet she did not excite him sexually. This was not
because he knew she was a machine, he decided; the robot
was more human and caring than most flesh-women he
knew. It was because she was a naked serf. Sheen had no
secrets, so lacked novelty. In contrast, the peek up the
skirts of the dressed ladies above—that, literally, clothed
his fancy and set his pulse racing.

"But the average Citizen can look and yawn," the Rifle-
man said, glancing again at the skirts above. "Clothing is
no novelty here. Nothing is novelty, except assured victory

132                    Juxtaposition

in an honest game of chance. You made Merle's day just
now; you were an unknown quantity, giving her the thrill
of uncertainty."

That reminded Stile. "Just how old is she, and how
much of her fortune would a hundred grams of Protonite
represent, if it's not uncouth to inquire?"

"The fortunes of all Citizens are a matter of public
record. She's worth about ten kilos; I can get the precise
figure for the moment, if you wish. The Records Com-
puter—"

"No, no need. So my wager did not hurt her."

"Not at all. Age is also on record. Merle is sixty-one
years old. She's had rejuvenation, of course, so she has the
face and body of a serf girl of thirty. But her mind is old. I
dare say she knows more about sex than you and I com-
bined."

Stile had noticed that most Citizen women were physi-
cally attractive, in contrast with the men. Rejuvenation
would of course account for this. It would not prolong life
significantly, but it would make a person seem young on
the day he died of age. The vanity of women caused them
to go this route.

Stile turned to the Rifleman. "I thank you for the cour-
tesy of your time. You have facilitated my education. Now
I think I will go home and assimilate my impressions, if I
may do so without offense to this gathering."

"No offense. You have made your appearance and per-
formed on stage; all interested Citizens have had oppor-
tunity to examine you. Go and relax. Stile."

"I really did not meet many Citizens. I suppose I'm not
much of a novelty."

The Rifleman smiled. "Allow me to detain you for one
more thing." He led Stile to an especially thick dust cloud.
Set just within its opacity was a control panel. A touch on
this, and an image formed above—Stile, playing poker
with Merle. The view shifted perspective as if the camera
were dollying around, showing Stile from all sides. An
inset showed the poker hands of each, changing as the
play progressed.

"I've been recordedl" Stile exdaimed.

Juxtaposition                     133

"Exactly," the Rifleman agreed. "All interested Citizens
are able to tune in on you—or on any other person here.
This is open territory, unprivate." He touched the controls
again, and the nether view of the dancing Citizens ap-
peared. "So-called X-ray views are also available, for those
who wish." Now the skirts and bloomers faded out, leav-
ing the Citizens dancing naked, looking exactly like serfs.

Stile was alarmed. "You mean viewers can strip me like
that, holographically?" He was concerned about exposure
of his physical reaction when viewing the inner skirts be-
fore.

"Indeed. Voyeurism is a prime Citizen pastime. That

particular thrill seems never to become passe."

Stile sighed inwardly. He surely had provided the voy-
eurs some innocent entertainment todayl "I appreciate
your advising me," he said, somewhat faintly.

"Welcome, Stile. I thought you would want to know.
Citizenship is not completely idyllic, and there are many
ways to be savaged unknowingly. Many Citizens prefer the

complete privacy of their domes."

"I can see why." And on that amicable note they parted.

Back in his transparent capsule. Stile relaxed. It had
actually been a joke on him, he decided, and harmless.
The Citizens had really looked him over and found him
human. He would be more alert in future.

But the joke had not finished. A call came in to the
travel capsule. When he acknowledged, the head of Merle
formed. Without her space helmet, she was revealed as a
rather pretty young woman, with the same delicate ron-
dure to her facial features as had been suggested by her
suit-shrouded torso. "I have decided I like you. Stile," she
said. "Would you care for an assignation?"

"Uh, what?" he asked awkwardly.

She laughed. "Oh, you are so refreshing! It has been
decades since I've had a truly naive man." The scope of
the image expanded, to reveal the upper half of her body
hanging in the air before him like a statuette, her small but
excellent breasts shrouded by a translucent shawl. She
must have viewed the holographic record of Stile's recent
experience and grasped his susceptibility to partial clothing

134 Juxtaposition

on women. "You can see that I am moderately endowed,
but please accept my assurance that I am expert with what
I have."

Stile proved his nalvete by blushing. "Sir, you catch me
unprepared. Uh—"

She actually clapped her hands in glee. "Oh, absolute
delight! I must have youl"

"I can't say I care to have holographs made of me
performing in such a situation," Stile said, his face
burning.

Merle pursed her lips. "But holos are the best part of it,
so that one can review the occasion at proper leisure and
improve technique."

Out of range of the holo pickup. Sheen signaled impera-
tively. She did not want Stile to offend the Citizen. Mellon
nodded agreement.

Stile took their advice. "Merle, as you can see, I'm
flattered to the point of confusion. This is more than I can
handle right now. Could you, would you grant me a stay
of decision?"

"Gladly, Stile," she agreed merrily. "I will contact you
tomorrow."

Some stayl "Thank you," he said, conscious that his
blush had intensified. He was thirty-five years old and
hardly inexperienced with women, but his underlying awe
of Citizens had betrayed him.

The moment the connection terminated, he snapped:

"Block off all other calls! I don't want any more of that!"

"We dare not block off Citizen calls," Sheen said. "But
I'll ask my friends to make an inoffensive excuse message
for you, and filter out as much as possible."

"Thanks." He caught her hand. "You're beautiful,
Sheen."

"I wish I could move you the way Citizen Merle did,"
she grumbled.

"She moved me to naked terrorl"

"Naked, yes; terror, no."

"She's a sixty-year-old woman!"

"In that respect I can not compete. I was made less than
a year ago."

That reminded him. "Sheen, has there been any progress

Juxtaposition                    135

on your origin? Have your friends discovered who sent
you to me and why?"

"I will query them," Sheen said, but paused. "Oops—a
call."

"I told you, I don't want—"

"From her."

There was only one person Sheen referred to that way.
"Oh. Put her on, of course."

The image formed. The Lady Blue faced him. "My
Lord, I dislike bothering thee, but I fear mischief."

"What mischief?" he demanded, instantly concerned.
The Lady Blue was no more beautiful, by objective stan-
dards, than Sheen, but she had completely captured his
love. It bothered him to have the fact so evident in Sheen's
presence, but there really was no way to avoid it in this
situation.

"Clip says he winds ogres." She glanced nervously about.
"We know not why such creatures should be on the isle
of the West Pole."

"I'll rejoin thee," Stile said.

"Nay, my Lord. Clip will guard me from harm. I merely
advise thee, just in case any difficulty arises."

"Very well," he agreed reluctantly. "But if there's any
sign of menace, call me right away. It will take me a while
to reach Phaze."

"I love thee. Lord Blue," she said, flashing her smile,
making the air about her brighten. Stile always liked that
magic effect. She faded out.

"Nevertheless," Stile said grimly to Sheen, "I want to
get closer to a curtain-crossing point. Or anywhere along
the curtain; once I step across, I can spell myself immedi-
ately to the West Pole."

Mellon was looking at him strangely. Stile smiled.
"Have Sheen fill you in more thoroughly; you machines
need to know this. I go to a world of magic, where I have
a lovely wife and am important."

"Yes, sir," Mellon said dubiously. "I trust this will not
interfere with your program of estate development."
-  "Please infer no insult from this," Stile told him. "But if
my Lady Blue is in danger, my entire Citizenship estate
can drop into deep space without a ship."

136                    Juxtaposition

"Thank you for clarifying your priorities, sir," Mellon
said stiffly.

"Oh, don't be stuffy," Sheen reproved the other robot.
"You have to take Stile on his own peculiar terms."

"Of course. He is a Citizen."

She turned to Stile. "My friends have a report."

"Let's have it." Stile was discovering that a lot of busi-
ness could be done on the move.

The image of a desk robot appeared. "Sir, the machine
of your inquiry was purchased by Citizen Kalder ten
weeks ago, programmed to love and protect the serf Stile,
and sent to said serf."

"But why?" Stile demanded. "Why should a Citizen
make an anonymous and expensive gift to a serf he does
not employ?"

"That information is not available, sir. I suggest you
contact Citizen Kalder." The image faded.

"At least now I have a name," Stile said. He pondered
brieHy. "How much does such a robot cost?"

"Approximately five grams of Protonite, sir," Mellon
replied. "This is my own value, which is typical for the
type."

"That is quintuple the twenty-year hire of a serf," Stile
said. "Maybe peanuts for a Citizen, but still out of propor-
tion for a throwaway gift. Easier to send a serf body-
guard." Another thought occurred. "Has my own estate
been docked that amount for you and the other special
personnel?"

"We are rented, sir," Mellon said. "By special arrange-
ment."

That meant that the self-willed machines had set it up.
They were covertly helping him, so that he could help
them. "What do your friends think of our engagement,
Sheen?"

"Sir, they are amazed, to the extent their circuitry and
programming permit. This changes the situation, giving
them the chance for recognition much sooner than other-
wise. There are grave risks, but they are willing to follow
this course."

"Good enough. I would like to secure your recognition
as serfs, not merely because of the help your kind has




juxtaposition                    137

given me at critical moments, but because I believe it is
right. Though if each of you costs five grams, I don't know
how it could be economic for you to work for serf's

wages."

"We can last several times as long as the tenure of a
serf," Mellon replied. "Once we achieve recognition, there
may be a premium for the service we can offer. Properly
programmed, we could be superior serfs, performing the
routine functions of several. Since we do not sleep, we can
accomplish more in a given tenure. The Protonite that
powers us is equivalent in value to the food that living
serfs consume, and our occasional necessary repairs equate
to live-person illness. We feel we shall be economic. But
even if we are not, we shall at least have the opportunity to
play the Game legitimately, and perhaps some few of our
number will advance to Citizenship. That prospect is more
important to us than mere service as serfs."

"So I gather," Stile agreed. He liked these intelligent
machines; he trusted them more than he did many living
people, partly because they remained simpler than people.
A robot could be deceitful if programmed to be—but what
was the point of such programming? Mainly he liked their
loyalty to him, personally. They trusted him, so aided him,
and he knew they would never betray him.

"Sir, do you wish me to place a call to Citizen Kalder?"
Sheen inquired.

"Yes, do it."

But at that point there was another call from the Lady
Blue. "The ogres are closing on us, my Lord," she said
worriedly. "I was not sure before that we were the object
of their quest, but now that seems likely. I mislike bother-
ing thee, but—"

"I'm on my way!" Stile cried. "Sheen,, reroute this tub to
the nearest intersection with the curtain. Forget about the
call to the Citizen; I'll tackle that later."

"Yes, sir," she said. The capsule shifted motion.

CHAPTER 7

The image of the Lady Blue remained. Stile worked his
unit controls to survey the area, looking outward from the
West Pole. In a moment he spied an ogre.

It was a large, hugely muscled humanoid creature,
strongly reminiscent of Stile's late friend Hulk. Stile felt a
pang at the memory; Hulk had been an intelligent, sensi-
tive, considerate man, a Gamesman like Stile himself—but
he had been betrayed and murdered by Stile's enemy. Stile
had sworn an oath of vengeance, which he had imple-
mented in his fashion—but that had not restored his
friend. In any event, the resemblance was superficial; the
ogre's face was a gross muddy morass of nose and mouth,
with two little eyes perched slightly above. The ears dan-
gled down like deflated tires.

Clip changed to man-form and approached the creature.
"Ogre, why dost thou come here?" the unicorn inquired.

"Blue be mine enemy," the creature croaked. Its open
mouth was like that of a frog with triangular teeth.

"Blue is not thine enemyi" the Lady called. "Blue had a
friend who was very like an ogre. Blue never harmed thy
kind. Why dost thou believe ill of him now?"

"The Grade says."

Another Oracular message? Stile distrusted this.

So did the Lady Blue. "Another message was altered,
methinks, to make Blue seem villain. Art thou sure—"

But the ogre, dim of wit, roared and charged, making
the ground tremble by the fall of its feet. Its hamfist swung
forward like a wrecking ball. Ogres simply were not much
for dialogue.

"I've got to get there!" Stile cried.
138

Juxtaposition                    139

"We are not yet at the curtain, sir," Sheen said. "It will
be another ten minutes."

Stile clenched his teeth and fists, watching the scene in
Phaze.

Clip shifted back to his natural form and launched him-
self after the ogre. The Lady Blue, no fainting flower in a
crisis, stepped nimbly aside. Ogre and unicom lunged past
her. Clip placing himself between the other two.

The ogre braked, its huge hairy feet literally screeching
against the turf. But as it reoriented on the Lady, the
unicom barred the way.

The ogre massed perhaps a thousand pounds. The uni-
com, small for his species, was about the same. The ogre's
hamfists were deadly—but so was the unicorn's pointed
hom. It was a momentary stand-off.

Then a second ogre appeared. "Look out behind thee,
Lady!" Stile cried. She heard him and whirled. The second
ogre's two hamhands were descending on her head.

The Lady ducked down and scooted between the mon-
ster's legs. The curtain was now just ahead of her. As the
ogre turned, she straddled the curtain and stood racing
it.

But other ogres were appearing. Two converged on the
Lady from either side of the curtain. Clip charged to help
her—but that permitted the first ogre to converge also.

As the two pounced, the Lady spelled herself across the
curtain, holding her breath. The ogres crashed into each
other where she had been. Stile could not see her in the
image; it was difficult to see across the curtain anyway,
and the holo pickup was oriented on the fantasy side. But
he knew she was in extreme discomfort, with the thin,
polluted air of Protonand the barren terrain.

But in a moment she reappeared, just beyond the brutes.
She had avoided them by using the curtain. Clip spied her
and rushed to join her again.

Two more ogres came into view. The five lumbered
down upon the woman and unicom. Clip launched himself
at the closest, lowering his hom, skewering the monster
through the center.

The ogre was so heavy the unicom could not lift it; Clip

140 Juxtaposition

had to back away, extricating his horn, shaldng the mon-
ster's blood from it. But the ogre was mortally wounded;

brown pus welled from the wound, front and back, and
the creature staggered and fell with a crash like that of an
uprooted tree.

Meanwhile, the remaining creatures had reconverged on
the Lady. "Here to me, Hinbluel" she called, and stepped
back across the curtain.

"Aren't we there yet?" Stile demanded. "She can't hold
out much longer!"

"Sir, there seems to be a power interruption," Sheen
said. "This passage needs repair; we must detour."

"How long?" Stile cried.

"Another Efteen minutes, sir, I fear."

Stile clapped his hands to his head in nonphysical pain.
"My Lady! My Lady!"

"I love her too, sir," Sheen murmured.

Stile could only watch the unfolding sequence help-
lessly. He should never have left the Lady Blue so lightly
guarded!

The Lady reappeared beyond the ogres as Hinblue ar-
rived. "Now you can catch me not!" she cried, vaulting on
to her 5ne steed,

The four ogres nevertheless started after her. Clip raced
to join Hinblue.

But as they moved out, readily outdistancing the mon-
sters, a small ravine appeared ahead. "Watch out!" Stile
cried.

Too late. The distracted horse put a foot in it. Instantly
Hinblue went down and the Lady flew off and forward.
Athlete that she was, she landed on her feet, running,
unhurt.

But Hinblue was hurt. She got to her feet, but she was
bruised and lame. She could only hobble, not run. The
ogres were closing in again.

Clip assumed man-form. "Lady, Tide me! The mare can
not carry thee."

"Oh, no!" Stile breathed. "I know what she will say."

"And desert my horse, offspring of the Hinny and the
Blue Stallion?" the Lady Blue demanded. "Never!"

juxtaposition                   141

"She said it," Stile said, suffering.

"Then must we guard her," Clip said. He became uni-
corn again, and stood facing the four onrushing brutes.

They were no longer astride the curtain. The Lady
could not use it to save herself—and in any event would
not have left her horse. She drew a narrow, sharp knife
and stood beside Clip, ready to fight.

The monsters came—but slowed. They had seen the fate
of the first one to encounter the unicorn's horn. Still, they
were four against two, and towered over their opposition.

A hole opened in the ground. An ugly head poked out,
swathed in bandages. For an instant Stile thought yet an-
other monster had joined the attack. But then he realized
it was Trool the troll, the one who had helped them escape
the Orange Demesnes. "Here!" the troll croaked.

The Lady recognized him. She was evidently uncertain
of the creature's motive. Her Adept husband was no
longer with her, and trolls liked human flesh.

"Escape," Trool said, indicating his tunnel. He was of-
fering a route out of the trap.

"I thank thee, Trool," the Lady said. "But my steed fits
not in thy tunnel."

The troll opened out another section of turf, and an-
other. There was a shallow cave there. "This crisis was
anticipated," he said, his voice becoming clearer, as if a
long-disused faculty was being revived. "I labored to pre-
pare."

The ogres were now very close. The Lady decided to
risk the help of the troll. Without further protest, she led
Hinblue into the cave, then stood at the entrance with her
knife poised.

The ogres, outraged at this seeming escape, charged into
the gully. But Clip charged too. His deadly horn punc-
tured another ogre, this time from the side. The monster
fell, squirting its brown juice, and again the others hesi-
tated. There were only three of them now, and they evi-
dently did not like dying. If any two had pounced on Clip
together, they could have torn the unicorn apart—but they
evidently lacked the wit or courage to do that. They also
seemed nervous about Trool, who was a monster some-

142                    Juxtaposition

what like themselves, though only half as stout. Why was
he participating?

"That is Neysa's brother, sir?" Sheen asked. The fact
that she was now using "sir" warned him that she was not
sure they had complete privacy.

"Yes. He's one good unicorn."

"And ogres eat people?"

"Yes. Trolls eat people, too, and horses. But Trool can
be trusted—I think."

Finally the ogres consulted, and came to the conclusion
Stile had feared. Two of them stalked Clip together, while
the third faced Trool, preventing the troll from interfering.
Stile realized an ogre should have been able to demolish a
troll on open ground, but not within a troll's tunnels, so
this was merely interference rather than combat. The Lady
Blue had to stay with the horse she guarded. Clip had to
fight alone.

The unicorn could have changed into hawk-form and
flown away, but he did not. He charged again. His horn
skewered the left ogre—but the right one brought a ham-
fist down on the unicorn's rump. Clip's hindsection col-
lapsed under the power of that blow. He was helpless,
down on the ground, his hindlegs possibly crippled, his
hom still wedged in the left ogre's torso.

Now the Lady Blue leaped forward, knife flashing. She
sliced into the heavy arm of the right-hand ogre. Ichor
welled out of a long slash, and the creature made a howl
of pain.

Now the two remaining monsters retreated, one holding
its wounded arm. Clip changed back into hawk-form, ex-
tricating himself, and the Lady held out her arm for him
to perch on. He seemed shaken, limping, but not seriously
hurt. Stile breathed a sigh of relief. The two returned to
the impromptu cave.

For a time the ogres stayed back. Stile relaxed some-
what. The longer they waited, the better his chance to get
to Phaze and correct the situation before any more harm
was done. The capsule was proceeding with what seemed
to him to be tedious slowness, but he knew Sheen was
doing her best.

He decided he should divert his mind, as long as he

juxtaposition                    143

could not act. "Place that call to the Citizen," he said
curtly. "But don't interfere with this image."

"Yes, sir." Sheen placed the call.

In a moment the face of a well-fed, middle-aged male
Citizen appeared beside the image of the West Pole region.
There were no serf or robot intermediaries this time.
"Yes?" he inquired, peering at Stile.

"Kalder, I am Stile," Stile said briskly. He was rapidly
shedding his apprehension about Citizens. "I am not sure
you know me—"

"I don't," Kalder agreed brusquely.

"But about two months ago you gifted me with a
humanoid robot. I was then a serf."

Kalder's face wrinkled in perplexity. "I did?"

"This robot," Stile said, indicating Sheen.

Still there was no recognition in the man's face. Was
this a misidentification? "Let me check my records," Kal-
der said.

In a moment the Citizen looked up. "I have it now. My
staff handled it, without informing me. It was a routine
protective measure."

"Routine measure?" Stile asked. "This is a five-gram
roboti Why would you give her to a serf employed by
another Citizen?"

Kalder's brow furrowed again. "That is peculiar. But
I'm sure my chief of staff had reason. Let me see—yes,
here it is. We received news that the chief 'horse trainer
and jockey of a rival stable was to be assassinated, and the
blame attached to me. I have one of the finest stables on
Proton." He said this matter-of-factly, and Stile believed
him. Citizens did not need to brag, and in his racing days
he had come up against the entries of a number of excel-
lent stables. He was probably familiar with Kalder's
horses, if he cared to do the spot research necessary to
align the Citizen's name with that of his stable. "Since that
would have been an unpleasant complication, my chief of
staff arranged to protect you anonymously. After all, it
might have been a practical joke, leading to my embar-
rassment. Why take a chance?"             ,.,•.,   -i

"You protected me—to save yourself from being framed
or embarrassed," Stile said slowly. "No other reason?"

144 Juxtaposition

"None. I had no concern for you personally. I was not
even aware of the matter until you called it to my atten-
tion just now. I leave such details to my staff."

That was some staffi But of course Stile had already
discovered the caliber of staff a Citizen could afford. "How
did your chief of staff know about this plot?"

Kalder checked his records again. "Anonymous mes-
sage. That's why it could have been a joke. Was it?"

"It was not," Stile said. "Your robot saved my life on
more than one occasion. Now I will marry her."

Kalder burst out laughing. "If her screws aren't loose,
yours are! Be sure to invite me to the weddingi I'll gift you
with a mail diaper for your cyborg offspring." He faded
out.

A cyborg was a combination of flesh and machine, such
as a robot with a grafted human brain, neither fish nor
fowl. They generally did not last long. This was a cruel
gibe, but Kalder was not a bad type, as Citizens went. The
mystery remained. Who had sent the anonymous message
to Kalder's staff?

"The same party who sicked the Red Adept on you,
perhaps," Sheen said, following his thought.

"And who may be fouling me up with changed Oracle
pronouncements," Stile agreed. "Now more of the pattern
emerges. It could all stem from a single source. That is my
true enemy."

"Why would an enemy arrange to have you protected?"

"Why, indeed!"

"My circuitry is inadequate to solve that problem," she
said, smiling briefly.

"And mine. Put your friends on that message to Kalder;

see if they can trace its source."

"Yes, sir." She made a coded call.

Now something new was happening in Fhaze. The scene
had been still while the Lady Blue put her hands on Clip
and healed his bruises and restored his confidence. The
ogres had stayed back. But Clip's ears—he was back in
natural form—were perking forward, and he blew a brief,
startled note.

"I see nothing," the Lady said. "What is it?"

Clip did not answer. His nostrils twitched. Obviously he

juxtaposition                     145

heard and smelled something. Now, very faintly. Stile
heard it too: the tinkling of little bells. Why did that seem
familiar?

Then the source came into sight. It was another uni-
corn. This one was female, and lovely. Her coat was a
deep red, almost purple, and shone with sleek health. Her
mane rippled iridescently. As she approached, she changed
to an elegant blue heron, then to a cat, and finally back to
equine form. Her bell rang again, sweetly.

Clip's ears vibrated with amazement. He blew a query-
ing note on his horn. The mare responded with a truly
melodious tinkling of bells.

"What does she say?" the Lady Blue asked nervously.

Clip changed to man-form. "She says she was thrown
out by her herd. She is all alone in the wilderness."

"She seems familiar."

"She and her brother danced at the Unolympics. They
defeated Neysa and me for the prize."

"Now I rememberi What a pretty 'corn she isl"

"Aye," Clip agreed wistfully.

"But why would her herd cast her out, after she brought
them the prize?"

"She refused to be bred by her Herd Stallion, who is
getting old and violent, so he exiled her. Now she is with-
out a herd."

"Can't she join another?"

"Nay, the Herd Stallions interfere not in each other's
herds. She is ostracized."

"The way Neysa was! That's terrible!"

"Neysa was merely excluded for a time. Belle can never
go back."

The pretty mare tinkled her bell again.

"She asks if I will go with her," Clip said.

"It's a trap," Stile said. "Don't trust her." But the holo
pickup was too far from the present setting for them to
hear him unless he shouted; transmission was largely one-
way now. He did not want to shout and have the ogres
know his situation.

"How is it she shows up here now?" the Lady inquired,
evidently having a similar suspicion.

But Clip, enchanted, changed back to equine form. As a

146 Juxtaposition

lesser male, he was not permitted the chance to breed.
This was obviously a phenomenal temptation.

The marc nickered and rang a lovely melody on her bell-
horn. Clip quivered with eagerness.

"I don't trust this at all!" Stile said. "Clip has defended
my Lady Blue against the monsters. Suddenly the love-
liest mare unicorn in all the herds appears, luring him
away."

"All males are fools in this manner," Sheen remarked.

"Clip, go not to heri" the Lady Blue pleaded. "At least
wait until my Lord returns. It will not be long now."

But Clip had lost control of himself. Evidently the mare
was in heat; he had to go to her. He fought the lure, but
step by step he went.

The Lady Blue had to remain in the cave, guarding
herself and Hinblue. She was not so foolish as to venture
where the ogres could pounce.

Now at last the capsule approached the curtain. But the
capsule was below ground, under desert; Stile could not
step through at this level. "Get me to the surface, any-
where by the curtain!" he snapped, in a fever of impa-
tience to reach the West Pole.

Sheen located a bus stop. Stile got out and hurried up
the stairs to the surface. "Keep things in order until my
return," he called back.

"Don't get yourself killed, sir," she said.

Stile didn't answer. He held his breath and burst out on
to the desert, running for the curtain. As he came upon its
shimmer, he willed himself across—and found himself
running on the green plain of Phaze.

Immediately he stopped, formulating a suitable spell in
his mind while he played his harmonica to summon his
power. Then he sang: "Convey me whole to the West
Pole."

The spell wrenched him from here to there, making him
nauseous. It was never comfortable to work his magic on
himself, and he avoided it except in emergencies. Feeling
ill, he looked out from the West Pole.

There was no sign of Clip the unicorn. Stile sang a flight-
spell he had in reserve, rose into the air, and zoomed
toward the ravine and cave where the Lady Blue waited.




juxtaposition

147

The two ogres were there. As Stile approached, one of
them picked up the troll one-handed and hurled him high
and away. Apparently Trool had left the security of his
tunnels and so fallen into the power of the more massive
monsters.

"Please—freeze," Stile sang, willing the interpretation of
the spell. But though there was a faint effort of magic, the
action did not stop.

Then he remembered that he had already used this spell
to freeze the sea monster of the Translucent Demesnes.
No wonder it had lost its potency. "All will be still," he
sang.

This time the tableau froze as intended. The two ogres
became statues, along with their injured companion, who
was licking his arm a short distance away. The troll hung
motionless in the air. The very wind stopped—but Stile
himself continued.

The Lady Blue stood in the cave, knife in hand, her
lovely face frozen in grinning ferocity as she slashed at the
nearest monster. Behind her stood Hinblue, lame but try-
ing to move outand get in a good kick.

Stile made a subspell to free the Lady only. "My LordI"
she exclaimed, breathlessly glad to see him. "Clip—he was
lured away!"

"I saw," Stile said. "First I must tend to thee and thy
friends; then will I quest after the unicorn."

The Lady was all right, though tired; it was no easy
thing to stand up to an ogre with no more than a knife.
Stile made a spell to restore Hinblue, whose injury had
been beyond the Lady's gentler healing power. Then he
brought Trool sliding slowly down from midair. "A second
time hast thou repaid my favor," Stile said. "Now do I
owe thee one."

"Nay, Adept," Trool protested. "It was prophesied that
three times must I tunnel to free thee and thine from
hazard, ere the balance evens."

"Then gladly do I accept this rescue of my Lady!" Stile
said. "But dost thou not know that the Blue Adept de-
stroyed all thy tribe in fire?"

"As my tribe destroyed all thy village. Those scales are
even. The debt is other."

148 juxtaposition

Stile shrugged. "Why shouldst thou be burdened, not
me?"

"Because thou must save Phaze." Trool turned and
shambled back into his tunnel, which extended darkly into
the ground. Stile was amazed at the creature's facility in
tunneling—but of course troll magic was involved.

Then he noticed an object on the ground. He stooped
carefully to pick it up, for his knees remained bad, able to
bend only to right angles before pain began. Stile could
use magic to move himself but not to heal himself, so had
to live with the condition. He picked up the object.

It was a small figurine of a woman, quite well executed.
"Who made this?" Stile asked.

"Trool," the Lady replied. "He appears clumsy, but his
big hands have magic. When he is not tunneling, he turns
that magic to sculpture, to relieve his nervousness."

"Facing two ogres, I can appreciate his conceml Why
did he step out on to the land, where they had power?"

"To stop them from charging me," she said. "Trolls are
not my favorite creature, but Trool acted bravely and
selflessly. If again we meet, I shall call him friend."

"Yet if he is honoring a prophecy, I can not reward
him," Stile said. "That might alter the meaning of his
action and void the prophecy, causing mischief."

"True," she agreed soberly.

Stile contemplated the figurine. "This is thee!" he ex-
claimed, surprised.

She shrugged. "He begged my leave. He works better
when he has a subject. I saw no harm."

Figurine magic could be potent—but the Red Adept
had specialized in that, with her amulets, and she was
gone. "No, no harm," Stile agreed. "He's a fine craftsman.
This is as pretty a statuette as I've seen."

"We forget Clip," she reminded him, taking the statu-
ette from him.

"In a moment. Now for these monsters." Stile conjured
a cage around the two, then unfroze them. They rattled
the bars for several minutes before conceding they were
effectively imprisoned; then they were ready to listen to
Stile.

Juxtaposition                    149

"Know, ogres, that I am the Blue Adept," Stile said.
"This is my Lady Blue. Why did the five of you attack
her?"

"Blue be now our enemy," one repeated.

"The Oracle told thee that?"

"Told Brogbt."

"Who is Brogbt?"

The ogre pointed to one of the dead monsters.

"Then must I make the dead to speak," Stile said
grimly. He pondered, working out a spell, then sang:

"Ogre Brogbt, under my spell, the true message do thou
tell."

The dead ogre stirred. Flies buzzed up angrily. Its rigor-
stiffened mouth cracked open. "Blue be not thine enemy,"
it croaked, and lay still again.

"Not!" the Lady exclaimed. "It said not!"

Both living ogres seemed surprised. "Brogbt told us
now."

"He thought the word was now. He was enchanted, and
heard or remembered it wrong. I am not thine enemy.
Now thou knowest."

"Now I know," the ogre agreed, adapting dully to this
new reality.

Stile eliminated their cage. "Go inform thy kind of the
truth."

They stomped away.

"Thou art as ever generous in victory," the Lady said.

"Now for the unicorn." Stile made a spell that set Clip's
hoofprints glowing, and they followed these. The trail led
over a hfll to a copse of evergreens and entered the dense
forest island.

"Where are the mare's prints?" the Lady asked.

Stile sang a new spell to make those also glow, but
evoked nothing.

"She was mere illusion," the Lady said. "A sending to
distract him so the ogres could get to me. This surely
means mischief. Had Trool not interfered—"

Stile made another spell. "Make an image, make it sooth,
- of the unicorn, of the truth."

The image formed, like a holograph, three-dimensional.

150 juxtaposition

Clip walked beside a phantom. The unreal mare led him
into the copse—and there a flash occurred, and the uni-
corn was gone.
"Destroyed?" the Lady cried, appalled.
"I think not," Stile said grimly. He tried a spell to locate
Clip specifically, but it fizzled. "This is Adept magic. I can
not fathom the truth beyond this point, for it is Adept
against Adept. But the message seems likely enough. Clip
has been taken hostage."
"Hostage!" she exclaimed. "For what?"
"For my behavior. My secret enemy can not match my
power directly, so he has resorted to another device. I
must bargain with him for Clip's life."
"But what does that Adept want?"
"It seems I am to be involved in great events in the near
future. Mine enemies know this, my friends know too.
Everybody knows this except me. What mine enemy wants
will surely be made known in good time."

"But no one can influence thee by such means!"
"Oh, yes, he cani" Stile scowled, feeling an elemental
savagery. "He can evoke my vengeance against him for
whatever he does to Clip. He can make me an enemy for
life. Now he is attacking my wife and steed in lieu of me,
seeking leverage. Not without consequence may Blue be
thus used."

She smiled sadly. "The honeymoon is over."
Soberly, he nodded. "I must report to the Herd Stallion."
"And I—I shall be left behind again."
"Thou knowest I love thee. Lady. But there are things I
must do."

"I would not change thy nature if I could, my love."
Abruptly, savagely, they kissed, their horror of the situ-
ation converting to passion. Then Stile spelled them to the
unicorn herd.

They arrived at the edge of the pasture where the uni-
corns grazed. The great Herd Stallion looked up. He stood
eighteen hands at the shoulder, or six feet, and was power-
fully muscled. His torso was pearly gray, darkening into
black hooves; his mane and tail were silver, and his head
golden. He was the most magnificent equine Stile knew.
Perceiving Stile's mien, the Stallion converted immedi-

Juxtaposition                     151

ately to man-form and approached. "Speak without waste,
Adept."

"Clip has been taken hostage," Stile said. Then he
choked and could not continue.

"Do thou go see Neysa," the Lady Blue told him gently.
"I will give the Stallion the detail."

Gratefully, Stile walked through the herd, looking for
his closest friend in Phaze. In a moment Neysa came to
him. She was fit and sleek, showing as yet no sign of her
gravid condition. She had only very recently been bred,
and equines did not show the way humans did. She ac-
cepted his embrace, shifting momentarily to girl-form in
his arms, in the mischievous way she had. Then she shifted
back.

"Oh, Neysa," he said, feeling the tears on his face. "I
fear I have placed your brother in dire straits."

She tensed, blowing a harmonica-note of alarm. She
loved her brother.

"I was in Proton-frame," he stumbled on. "Ogres at-
tacked the Lady Blue. Clip fought valiantly, protecting
her, and killed two ogres. But an Adept sent a sending of
the mare called Belle, who won thine event in the Un-
olympics, and lured him into captivity, surely hostage
against my power. And I—I can not accept what that
enemy may demand of me, though Clip is—" The tears
were flowing freely now, dropping from his chin. "I should
have been there!" And perhaps, if he had checked Clip's
situation first, instead of last, he might have been in time
to nullify the abduction. He had just assumed that Clip
was near.

Neysa laid her warm horn against his cheek, suffering
silently with him, forgiving him. She understood.

They walked together back to the Herd Stallion. The
noble creature was again in his natural form and had
evidently assimilated the Lady's story. He was stomping
the turf with one forehoof, making sparks fly up, and
steam was issuing from his nostrils.

When Stile rejoined him, the Stallion changed again to
man-form, a wisp of steam still showing in his breath.
"Thou art not at fault. Adept," he said. "Clip was there to
help and protect thee, not thou him."

1S2

juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

153

"Protect me he did," Stile said. "I owe him my life. But
he lost his freedom protecting not me but my Lady. I must
restore him to freedom and avenge what he is suffering."

"He is of my herd," the Stallion said. "Ultimately, ven-
geance is mine. But thou art welcome to free him if thou

canst."

"First must I locate him," Stile said. "And, if thou canst
permit it, I would take another unicorn as temporary
steed. The forces ranged against me, for whatever reason,
are more than I can safely cope with alone, and no horse
suffices. I need the kind of service only a unicorn can

give."

The Stallion hesitated. Neysa blew a faint note on her
harmonica-hom, half pleading, half warning. She was sub-
ject to the Herd Stallion, but friend to the Blue Adept—-
and to many others. She was close blood kin to Clip. She
wanted to be Stile's steed again, despite her condition. The
Stallion could say nay or yea and would be obeyed—but
his life would be simpIiEed if he placated this spirited little
mare. Stile had a certain sympathy for the Herd Stallion's
predicament.

"I will provide thee with another unicorn," the Stallion
decided. "Thou art held in unusual respect in this herd,
Adept; a number of these would do for thee what they
would not do for any ordinary man. Yet may I not compel
any in this matter; give me time to seek a volunteer."

The Stallion seemed less urgent about this than Stile
felt, and was obliquely refusing Neysa's offer. Yet it was a
sensible course. "It will take time to locate Clip and pre-
pare a campaign to recover him without injury," Stile said.
"Adept magic is involved, making the matter devious, not
subject to simple spells. I do not relish his captivity for
even another hour, but it would be foolish to strike unpre-
pared. Will a day and a night suffice? I do have business in
the other frame."

"It will suffice," the Stallion agreed. "I shall query the
animals of other kinds and send to the Oracle."

The Oracle! Of coursel That would pinpoint Clip in-
stantly—if the answer were not misunderstood. Except—
what about the speculation the Translucent Adept had

made about the Oracle? Maybe he should be careful of
any advice received, without openly challenging its validity.
Stile turned to the Lady Blue. "Now must I return thee
to the Blue Demesnes for safekeeping."

Again Neysa protested. The Herd Stallion, shirting to
natural form, blew an accordion-chord of irritated acqui-
escence.

"I have been invited to visit with the Herd during thine
absence," the Lady said. "I can be better guarded here, for
no magic penetrates a herd on guard. By thy leave, my
Lord—"

"I will make thee a pavilion," Stile said, pleased. She
would be much safer here, certainly.

"I need it not, my Lord."

Stile nodded. The Lady Blue was no frail flower; she
could survive well enough. "Then shall I—"

He paused, and the unicorns looked up from their graz-
ing. A dragon was approaching—a huge flying creature,
swooping up and down, evidently searching for something.
It spied the herd and flew directly toward it.

Immediately the unicorns formed a circle, horns point-
ing out. In the center were the foals and aged individuals
—and Neysa, specially protected during her gestation. The
Herd Stallion stood outside, flanked by several of the
strongest of the lesser males, facing the monster alertly.

"I can deal with this," Stile offered. He had a number of
spells to bring down dragons.

But the dragon was not attacking. It was a steed, with
an old woman holding the reins, perched between the great
beating wings. She carried a white kerchief that she waved
in her left hand.

"Flag of truce," Stile said. Then, with a double take:

"That's the Yellow Adept!"

The Herd Stallion snorted angrily. He would honor the
truce, but he had no love for the Yellow Adept, whose
business it was to trap and sell animals, including unicorns.

The dragon landed with a bump that made its passenger
bounce, then folded its wings. The old woman scrambled
down. "I bear a message for Blue. It must be quick, for
my potion can not hold this monster long."




154 juxtaposition

Stile stepped forward, still surprised. Usually this witch
only went out in public after talcing a youth potion for
cosmetic effect. What message could cause her to scramble
like this? "I am here. Yellow."

"It is in the form of a package, my handsome," she said,
handing him a long box that appeared from her shawl.
Stile suddenly became conscious of his own apparel: the
outEt of a Proton Citizen. In the rush of events he had not
bothered to conjure Phaze clothing. But it hardly mat-
tered; an Adept, like a Citizen, could wear what he pleased.
"I want thee to know I had no hand in this particular
mischief. The item was delivered by conjuration with the
message: Blue butt out. I hastened to bring it to thee,
fearing further malice against thee an I delayed. My po-
tions indicate that more than one Adept participates in
this."

She hurried back to her dragon-steed before Stile could
open the package. "Wait, Yellow—I may wish to question
thee about this!" Stile called. Something about the package
gave him an extremely ugly premonition.

"I dare not stay," she called back. "I would help thee if
I could. Blue, for thou art a bonny lad. But I can not."
She spurred her dragon forward. The creature spread its
wings and taxied along on six little legs, finally getting up
to takeoff velocity. Once it was airborne, it was much
more graceful. Soon it was flying high and away.

Stile unwrapped the package with a certain misgiving. It
surely did not contain anything he would be glad to see.
Probably it was from Clip's captor; some evidence that the
unicorn was indeed hostage, such as a hank of his blue
mane.

As the package unwrapped, two red socks fell out.
Clip's socks, which could be magically removed and used
separately, in the same manner as Neysa's white socks.
But there was something else in the package. Stile un-
wrapped it—and froze, appalled. All the others stared, not
at first believing it.

It was a severed unicorn hom.

Stile's hands began to shake. He heard the Lady Blue's
quick intake of breath. Neysa blew a note of purest agony.

Juxtaposition                     155

Slowly Stile lifted the hom to his mouth. He blew into
the hollow base. The sound of an ill-played saxophone
emerged. It was definitely Clip's hom.

Neysa fell to the ground as if stricken by lightning. The
Lady Blue dropped down beside her, putting her arms
about the unicorn's neck in a futile attempt to console her.
Stile stood stiffly, his mind half numbed by the horror of
it. To a unicorn, the hom was everything, the mark that
distinguished him from the mere horse.

More than that, he realized, the hom was the seat of the
unicorn's magic. Without it. Clip could not change form
or resist hostile spells. He would be like a man blinded and
castrated—alive without joy. There could be no worse
punishment.

The Herd Stallion was back in man-form. He put forth
his large hand to take the horn. His eyes were blazing like
the windows of a furnace, and steam was rising from him.
"They dare I" he rasped, staring at the member.

"For this will I visit a conflagration on the Demesnes of
every Adept involved!" Stile said, finding his voice at last.
"On every creature who cooperated. I will level mountains
to get at them. What the Blue Adept did to the trolls and
jackals shall be as nothing." Already the air was becoming
charged with the force of his developing oath; dark coils
of fog were swirling. "Only let me make my music, find
my rhyme—"

"Nay, Adept," the Herd Stallion said gruffly. "He is of
my herd. Not thine but mine is this vengeance."

"But thou canst not leave thy herd unguarded," Stile
protested.

"Another Stallion will assist, for this occasion."

"And thou canst not face Adepts alone. Only an Adept
can oppose an Adept."

The Stallion snorted smoke from his human nostrils,
heeding Stile's caution through his fury. "True. Not alone
can I accomplish it. Only half the vengeance is mine to
claim."

"Just give me a steed, and I will—"

"I will be thy steed!" the Stallion said.

Neysa, on the ground, perked up her ears. The Lady

156                    juxtaposition

Blue's eyes widened as she recognized the possibilities. No
human being had ever ridden a Herd Stallion, virtually a
breed apart. Yet if the power of an Adept coordinated
with that of a unicorn Stallion—

Stile could not decline. They shared a vengeance.

CHAPTER 8

Wager

"So I have most of twenty-four hours in Proton," Stile said
to Sheen, "before the Stallion and I commence our mission
of rescue and vengeance. I'll have to spend some of that
time in sleep, gathering my strength. I trust you have my
business here well organized."

"We do," she agreed brightly. "Mellon has lined up a
number of wealthy Citizens who are eager to wipe you out
financially. My friends have worked out a way to trace the
original message to Citizen Kalder—but only you, an in-
terested Citizen, can implement it. And there is reaction
approaching suppressed riot to the news of the designation
of your heir."

"That's enough to start on," Stile said. "Maybe it will
distract me for the moment from my real concern in
Phaze. Let's see how much we can sandwich in. I don't
know how long my next adventure in Phaze will hold
me."

"Perhaps forever," she said darkly. Then, mechanically,
she reverted to immediate business. "Start on which, sir?
You can't do everything at once."

"Why not?"

"The bettors are in the Stellar Lounge, as before. The
panel for your heir-designation hearing is in another
dome, a hundred kilometers distant. And the first ob-

Juxfaposition                    157

scurity in the message chain is at a dome fifty kilometeis
beyond that, in the private property of a Citizen. Any one
of these situations can monopolize your available time."

"You think too much like a machine," he chided her.
"Take me to the hearing. Meanwhile, call the Stellar
Lounge."

Frowning, she set the travel capsule in motion and
placed the call. Mellon appeared in three-dimensional
image. "So good to see you, sir. May I notify the Citizens
that you are ready for action?"

"Do so," Stile said. "But advise them that I have un-
usual and challenging bets in mind and will welcome them
at the site of my heir-designation hearing. You be there
too."

"Yes, sir." Mellon faded out.

Immediately there was an incoming call. It was Citizen
Merle. "My intercept notified me you were back in town,"
she said brightly. "Have you considered my invitation of
the morning?"

Not this againi "Merle, I remain flattered. But there are
things you should know."

"About your lovely wife in the other frame? Stile, that
has no force in Proton."

"About my engagement to the serf Sheen, here," Stile
said, unpleased about Merle's conversance with his private
life. Too many Citizens were learning too much about
him.

"Yes, I mean to place a bet on the outcome of your
hearing," Merle agreed. "I'm rooting for you. Stile; I'm
betting you will gain approval, after a struggle. Citizens
are by no means limited in their liaisons. I have gifted my
husband with a number of fine concubines, and he has
sent me whichever males he suspects will appeal to my
tastes. In any event, you need have no concern about the
feelings of a serf."

Stile suffered an explosive reaction of anger. Sheen
made an urgent signal: do not offend this Citizen!

Then Stile had a tactical inspiration. "Merle, I do care
about the feelings of this serf. I was until very recently a
serf myself. Until I have a better notion of her willingness
to share, I can not give you a decision."




158 juxtaposition

Merle smiled. "Oh, I do like you, little man! You are
like a splendid fish, fighting the line. I shall be in touch
with you anon." She faded.

"Sir, I never denied you the right to—" Sheen began.

"Secure our privacyi" he snapped.

She adjusted the communication controls. "Secure, sir."

'Then why are you calling me sir?"

"Stile, our relationship has changed. We are no longer
even nominally members of the same society, and I prefer
to recognize that in the established way. Sir."

"You're mad at me?"

"A machine can not be angry, sir."

Fat chance! "Sheen, you know that our marriage is one
of convenience. I'm doing it to give your friends leverage
in their suit for recognition. The upcoming hearing will be
a crucial step. If we prevail there, it will be a big stride
forward for your kind. I do like you, in fact I love you—
but the Lady Blue will always hold the final key to my
heart."

"I understand, sir." Her face was composed.

"So being faithful to you, in this frame, is moot," he
continued, wishing she would show more of the emotion
he knew she felt. "It is the Lady Blue I am faithful to. But
aside from that, there is the matter of appearances. If I am
engaged to you, but have liaisons with fleshly women—
especially Citizens—that could be taken as evidence that I
am marrying you in name only, to designate a convenient
heir, and that could destroy the leverage we hope to gain."

"Yes, sir," she agreed noncommittally.

"So there is no way I will make an assignation with
Merle. If I do that with anyone in this frame, it will be
you. Because you are my fiancee, and because there is no
one in this frame I would rather do it with. So, in that
sense, I am true to you. I wanted to be sure you under-
stand."

"I understand, sir. There is no need to review it."

So he hadn't persuaded her. "Yes, I needed to review it.
Because now I have it in mind to do something extremely
cynical. An act worthy of a true Citizen. And I need your
help."

"You have it, sir."

Juxtaposition                    159

"I want you to have your friends arrange a blind bet on
the outcome of Merle's suit. An anonymous, coded bet
amounting to my entire available net worth at the time of
decision—that I will not complete that liaison. I will of
course deny any intent to make that liaison, but I may at
times seem to waver. You and I know the outcome, but
other Citizens may wish to bet the other way. It would be
a foolish bet for them—but they seem to like such foolish-
ness."

Sheen smiled. "That is indeed cynical, sir. I shall see to
it."

"And it would not hurt if you permitted yourself some
trifling show of jealousy, even if you feel none."

She paused. "You are devious, sir."

"I have joined a devious society. Meanwhile, I shall
remain on the fence with Merle, in all but words, as long
as I can stimulate interest. See that Mellon is privately
notified; he definitely has the need to know."

The capsule arrived at the dome of the hearing. They
emerged into a white-columned court, floored with marble,
spacious and airy as a Greek ruin. Three Citizens sat be-
hind an elevated desk. A fourth Citizen stood before the
desk, evidently with another case; Stile's turn had not yet
come.

The betting Citizens were arriving. A rotund man
garbed like a Roman senator approached, hand extended.
"Greeting, Stile. I am Waldens, and I'm interested in your
offer. What is its nature?"

"Thank you, Waldens. I am about to face a hearing on
the validity of my designation of my fiancee, a humanoid
robot, as my heir to Citizenship. I proffer a wager as to the
panel's decision."

"Most interesting!" Waldens agreed. "I doubt they will
approve the designation."

"I am prepared to wager whatever my financial adviser
will permit, that they will approve it," Stile said. "It is,
after all, a Citizen's right to designate whom he pleases."

"Ah, yes—but a robot is not a 'whom' but an 'it.' Only
recognized people can inherit Citizenship."

"Is there a law to that effect?"

"Why, I assume so. It is certainly custom."

160 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 161

Now Mellon arrived. Stile quickly acquainted him with
the situation. "How much will you let me bet?" he asked,
knowing that Mellon, as a self-willed machine in touch
with the network of his kind, would have a dear notion of
the legalistic background.

But the serf hesitated. "Sir, this is an imponderable. The
decision of the panel is advisory, without binding force. If
there is a continuing challenge, a formal court will be
convened—"

"Come off it, serf!" Waldens snapped. "We're only bet-
ting on this particular decision. What the court does later
will be grist for another wager. How much Protonite can
Stile afford to risk?"

"He has limited me to one hundred grams," Stile said,
catching Sheen's covert affirmative signal. That meant the
machines had researched the issue, and believed the odds
were with Stile. He should win this bet. But he was going
to play it carefully.

"A hundred gramsl" Waldens laughed. "I did not come
all the way here in person for such minor action!"

"I regret that my estate is as yet minimal," Stile said.
"But it is growing; I have won all bets made so far. I
assure you that I have an appetite for larger bets—when I
can afford them. I plan to increase my estate enormously."

"All right. Stile. You're peanuts, but I like your spirit.
Should be good entertainment here. I'll play along with a
small bet now—but 111 expect a big one later, if you're in
shape for it. Shall we compromise at half a kilo now?"

Mellon looked pained, but under Walden's glare he
slowly acquiesced. "Half a kilogram of Protonite," Stile
agreed, putting on a pale face himself. Five hundred grams
was half the ransom of a Citizen, and more than half
Stile's entire available amount for betting. His fortune
stood at 1,219 grams, but he had to hold 250 for living
expenses. What he was laying on the line now was enough
to buy a hundred sophisticated robots like Sheen and
Mellon, or to endow the tenure of Eve hundred serfs. All
in a single bet—which his opponent considered to be a
minor figure, a nuisance indulged in only for entertain-
menti

Meanwhile, other Citizens had arrived, intrigued by the

issue. Novelty was a precious commodity among those
who had everything. Two paired off, taking the two sides
with matching half-kilo bets. Two more bet on whether
there would be an immediate appeal of the panel's recom-
mendation, whatever it was. Citizens certainly loved to
gamble!

The prior case cleared, and it was Stile's turn before the
panel. "It has been brought to our attention that you pro-
pose to designate a humanoid robot as your heir to Citi-
zenship," the presiding Citizen said. "Do you care to
present your rationale?"

Stile knew this had to be good. These were not objective
machines but subjective people, which was why there
could be no certainty about the decision. The wrong words
could foul it up. "I am a very recent Citizen, whose life
has been threatened by calamitous events; I am conscious
of my mortality and wish to provide for the continuation
of my estate. Therefore I have designated as my heir the
person who is closest to me in Proton: my prospective
wife, the Lady Sheen, here." He indicated Sheen, who cast
her eyes down demurely. "She happens to be a lady robot.
As you surely know, robots are sophisticated today; she is
hardly distinguishable from a living person in ordinary
interactions. She can eat and sleep and initiate complex
sequences. She can even evince bad temper."

"The typical woman," the presiding Citizen agreed with
a brief smile. "Please come to the point."

"Sheen has saved my life on more than one occasion,
and she means more to me than any other person here. I
have made her my chief of staff and am satisfied with the
manner in which she is running my estate. I want to make
our association more binding. Unless there is a regulation
preventing the designation of one's wife as one's heir, I see
no problem."

The three panelists deliberated. "There is no precedent,"
the presiding Citizen said. "No one has designated a robot
before. Machines do well enough as staff members, concu-
bines, stand-ins, and such, but seldom is one married and
never have we had a nonhuman Citizen."

"If an alien creature won the Tourney one year, would
it be granted Citizenship?" Stile asked.




162                    juxtaposition

"Of course. Good point," the Citizen said, nodding.
"But robots are not permitted to participate in the Game,
so can not win the Tourney."

"Do you mean to tell me that a frog-eyed, tentacular
mass of slime from the farthest wash of the galaxy can be
a Citizen—but this woman can not?" Stile demanded,
again indicating Sheen.

The Citizens of the panel and of the group of bettors
looked at Sheen, considering her as a person. She stood
there bravely, smooth chin elevated, green eyes bright, her
light brown hair flowing down her backside. Her face and
figure were exquisitely female. There was even a slight
flush at her throat. She had been created beautiful; in this
moment she was splendid.

"But a robot has no human feeling," another panelist
said.

"How many Citizens do?" Stile asked.

The bettors laughed. "Good shot!" Waldens muttered.

The panelists did not respond to the humor. "A robot
has no personal volition," the presiding Citizen said. "A
robot is not alive."

This was awkward territory. Stile had promised not to
give away the nature of the self-willed machines, who did
indeed have personal volition. But he saw a way through.

"Sheen is a very special robot, the top of her class of
machine," he said. "Her brain is half digital, half analog,
much as is the human brain, figuratively. Two hemi-
spheres, with differing modes of operation. She approxi-
mates human consciousness and initiative as closely as a
machine can. She has been programmed to resemble a
living woman in all things, to think of herself as possessing
the cares and concerns of life. She believes she has feeling
and volition, because this is the nature of her program and
her construction." As he spoke, he remembered his first
discussion with Sheen on this subject, before he discovered
the frame of Phaze. He had chided her on her illusion of
consciousness, and she had challenged him to prove he
had free will. She had won her point, and he had come to
love her as a person-^a robot person. He had tended to
forget, since his marriage to the Lady Blue, how deep his

Juxtaposition                    163

feeling for Sheen was. Now he was swinging back to her.
He truly believed she was a real person, whose mechanism
happened to differ from his own but resulted in the same
kind of personality.

"Many creatures have illusions," a panelist remarked.
'This is no necessary onus for Citizenship."

Stile saw that more would be required to overcome their
prejudice. He would have to do a thing he did not like.

"Sheen, how do you feel about me?" he asked.

"I love you, sir," she said.

"But you know I can not truly love a machine."

<<! know, sir."

"And you are a machine."

"Yes, sir"

"I will marry you and designate you as my heir to
Citizenship, but I will not love you as man to woman. You
know it is a marriage of convenience."

"I know, sir."

"Why do you submit to this indignity?"

"Because she wants Citizenshipl" a Citizen exclaimed.
He was one of the ones betting against the acceptance of
the heir designation.

Stile turned to the man. "How can a machine want?"
Then he returned to Sheen. "Do you want Citizenship?"

"No, sir."

"Then why do you accede to this arrangement?"

"Because your wife in Phaze asked me to."

"Oh, a stand-in for an other-frame wifel" Waldens said
knowingly. "Cast in her image?"

"No, sir, she is beautiful," Sheen said. "I can never
substitute for her."

'1 am interested," the presiding panelist said. "Robot,
are you capable of emotion? Do you feel, or think you
feel? Do you want anything?"

"Yes, sir, to all three," Sheen replied.

"Exactly what do you want, if not Citizenship?"

"I want Stile's love, sir," she said.

The panelist looked at his co-panelists. "Let the record
note that the robot is crying."

All the Citizens looked closely at Sheen. Her posture

164                    Juxtaposition

and expression had not changed, but the tears were
streaming down her cheeks.

"Why would any woman, human or robot, cry in re-
sponse to simple, straightforward questions?" a panelist
asked.

Citizen Waldens stepped forward suddenly, putting his
cloaked arm around Sheen's shoulders. "For God's sakel
She is not on triall Spare her this crueltyl"

The presiding panelist nodded sagely. "She weeps be-
cause she knows she can never have her love returned by
the man she loves, no matter what else he gives her. Our
questioning made this truth unconscionably clear, causing
her to react as the woman she represents would act. I do
not believe she was conscious of the tears, or that this is a
detail that would have occurred to a man." He pondered a
moment, then spoke deliberately. "We of this panel are not
without feeling ourselves. We are satisfied that this person,
the robot Sheen, is as deserving of Citizenship as is a frog-
eyed, tentacular mass of slime from the farthest wash of
the galaxy." He glanced at his co-panelists for confirma-
tion. "We therefore approve the robot Sheen's designation
as heir, pending such decision as the court may make."

The Citizens applauded politely. Waldens brought Sheen
back to Stile. "I'm glad to lose that bet. Stile. She's a good
woman. Reminds me of my wife, when she was young and
feeling. This robot deserves better than you are giving
her."

"Yes," Stile agreed.

Waldens started to turn away, then snapped back in a
double take. "I'll be damnedl You're crying tool"

Stile nodded dumbly.

"And you think you don't love her." The Citizen
shrugged. "Care to make a bet on that?"

"No," Stile said.

Sheen turned to him with incredulous surmise, "The
illusion of nonfeeling—it is yoursi" she said. "The Lady

knewl"

The Lady had known. Stile was indeed a man of two
loves, suppressing one for the sake of the other—in vain.

"Well, I'll bet you on something else," Waldens said.

juxtaposition                    165

"One kilo, this time. I happen to know you can afford
it."

Stile wrenched himself back to the practicalities of the
moment. He looked at Mellon. "Can I?"

"Sir, your betting is becoming more hazardous than
necessary."

"That's his way of saying yes," Waldens said. "I feel
you owe me one more bet. It wasn't right to use your girl
that way. You set her up for it, knowing how she loved
you."

"Yet he gave back more than he took," Sheen said.
There was now a certain radiance about her, the knowl-
edge of discovered treasure. Stile had actually set himself
up.

"Ill give you your bet," Stile agreed. "And 111 match
anybody else, if I don't run out of grams. Right now I
have to trace an old message to its source. Care to bet
whether I make it?"

"No. I don't know enough about the situation. But III
bet when I do. You are involved in odd things, for a new
Citizen. Usually they're busy for the first month just ex-
periencing the novelty of having serfs say sir to them."

"I have some equipment waiting at the site," Stile said.
He gave the address, and the other Citizens dispersed to
their private capsules.

Alone with Sheen and Mellon in his own capsule. Stile
looked at Sheen. Emotion overwhelmed him. "Damn!" he
exclaimed. "I'm sorry. Sheen."

She paused momentarily, analyzing which level he was
on. "You had to do it, sir. It was necessity, not cruelty,
sir."

"Stop calling me sirl" he cried.

"When we are alone," she agreed.
"Maybe I am fooling myself. Maybe what I feel for you
is what most others would call love. But since I met the
Lady Blue—"

She laid her soft hand on his. "I would not change you
if I could."

Which was what the Lady Blue had said. Sheen could
have had no way to know that.

166 juxtaposition

"It is an interesting relation you share," Mellon said. "I
am not programmed for romantic emotion. I admit to
curiosity as to its nature and usefulness."

"You are better off not knowing," Sheen said, squeezing
Stile's hand.

"I do experience excitement when a large property
transaction is imminent."

"If the self-willed machines gain recognition," Stile said,
"you will receive whatever programming you wish, includ-
ing romantic. For now, she's right; you are happier as you
are."

"I will be ecstatic if I complete your target fortune. So
far I have had little to do with it. I fear my circuits will
short out, observing your mode of operation."

Stile smiled. "Now that I have inordinate wealth, I find
it does not mean much to me," he said. "It is merely the
substance of another game. I want to win, of course—but
my real ambition lies elsewhere." He glanced again at
Sheen. "My emotion is so erratic, I really think it would be
better for you to accept reprogramming to eliminate your
love for me. It would save you so much grief—"

"Or you could accept conditioning to eliminate your
love for the Lady Blue," she said.

"Touche."

"Or to diminish your prejudice against robots."

"I'm not prejudiced against—" He paused. "Damn it,
now I know I could love you. Sheen, if I didn't have the
Lady Blue. But my cultural conditioning ... I would
prefer to give up life itself, rather than lose her."

"Of course. I feel the same about you. Now I know I
have enough of you to make my existence worthwhile."

She was happy with half a loaf. Stile still felt guilty.
"Sometimes I wish there were another me. That I had two
selves again, with one who was available for Citizenship
and who would love you, while the other could roam
forever free in Phaze." He sighed. "But of course when
there were two of me, I knew about none of this. My other
self had the Lady Blue."

"That self committed suicide," she said.

"Suicidel By no means! He was murderedl"

T

Juxtaposition                    167

"He accepted murder. Perhaps that is not clear to your
illogical and vacillating mind."

"My mind was hisi"

"In a different situation. He had reason."

Accepted murder. Stile considered that. He had mar-
veled before that the Blue Adept had been dispatched by
so crude a device—strangled by a demon from an amulet.
It was indeed a suspicious situation. No magic of that sort
had been able to kill Stile; why had it worked against his
other self? And the Blue Adept's harmonica, his prized
possession, had been left for Stile to find, conveniently.
Yet suicide—could that be believed? If so, why? Why
would any man permit himself to be ignominiously slain?
Why, specifically, should Stile himself, in his other guise,
permit it? He simply was not the type.

"You say he had reason. Why do you feel he did that?"

"Because he lacked enough of the love of the one he
loved," she said promptly.

"But the Lady Blue gave him the third thee," he pro-
tested. "In Phaze, that is absolute love."

"But it was late and slow, and as much from duty and
guilt as from true feeling. Much the same as your love for
me. I, too, tried to suicide."

Indeed she had, once. One might debate whether a non-
living creature could die, but Sheen had certainly tried to
destroy herself. Only the compassion of the Lady Blue had
restored Sheen's will to endure. The Lady Blue, obviously,
had understood. What a hard lesson she had learned when
her husband died!

"Somehow I shall do right by you. Sheen," Stile said. "I
don't know how, right now, but I will find a way."

"Maybe with magic," she said, unsmiling.

They arrived at the site of the message-tracing team.
Stile was glad to let this conversation drop. He loved
Sheen, but not consistently and not enough. His personal
life in Proton seemed to be an unravelable knot.

They were in one of the public lavatories for serfs, with
rows of sinks, toilets, and showers. The message cable
passed the length of its floor, buried but within range of
the detector. Passing serfs, seeing a Citizen present, hastily
departed for other facilities.

168 juxtaposition

There was a serf technician with a small but complex
machine on two wheels. The machine blinked and bleeped
in response to the serf's comments. No, Stile realized, it
was the other way around. The serf commented in re-
sponse to the device. It was another self-willed machine,
with a subordinate serf. A neat way to conceal the real
nature of the assistance being provided. The self-willed
machines had considerable resources but did not want to
betray their nature to the Citizens, lest the machines be
summarily destroyed. There was a difference between
being programmed to mimic personal volition, as Sheen
was presumed to be, and actually possessing that volition,
as Sheen and her kind did. The makers of these most
sophisticated robots had wrought better than they knew,
which was the reason these machines wanted legal recogni-
tion as people. They were people, of mechanical nature.
With such recognition they could not be dispatched with-
out legal reason, lest it be called murder.

The signals from the machine were more or less contin-
uous and were ignored by the Citizens who joined Stile's
party for the betting. Thus the real nature of the com-
munications was not obvious. Only Stile, with his private
knowledge of the special machines and his Game-trained
alertness for detail, was aware of it. "What have we here?"
he inquired of the serf.

"Sir, this is an electronic device that can trace the route
of a particular message at a particular moment," the serf
said. "Each message modifies, the atomic structure of the
transmission wires nominally. This change is so small that
only a sophisticated instrument can detect it, and the
range is quite limited. But it is possible to trace the stig-
mata by examining the wires at close range, provided we
know precisely what we are looking for."

"Like a hound sniffing a scent," Stile said.

The machine bleeped. "Yes, sir," the serf said.

"That's a new one to me," Waldens said. "But I never
did concern myself with machines. I think 111 buy me one
like the metal lady here, if I don't win this one in a
bet."

Both Sheen and Stile reacted, startled. Neither was
pleased. Waldens laughed. "Stile, you don't have to bet

T

juxtaposition                    169

anything you don't want to. But you should be aware that
this lady robot is now a piece worth a good deal more than
she was when new. If you lose a big one and have to have
a new stake, she is it." He glanced at the message-tracing
machine. "Now let's see this contraption operate."

"You have programmed the specific message and time
of transmission?" Stile inquired. "Why are you unable to
continue?"

Again the bleep. "Yes, sir. We have traced the message
to this point. But ahead the cable passes through a junc-
ture associated with the estate of a Citizen who denies us
permission to prospect here."

"Ah, now the challenge comes clear," Waldens said.
"What Citizen?"

"Sir, serfs do not identify Citizens by name," the serf
said, translating the machine's signals. "But his designation
is at the gate."

Waldens strode out of the lavatory and down the hall to
examine the gate. The others followed. "Circle-Tesseract
symbol." He brought out a miniature mike. "Who's
that?"

"Sir, that is Citizen Cirtess," his contact answered.

"Cirtess. Circle-Tesseract. That figures. Same way I
have a forest pond on my crest. I know him." Waldens
considered. "Stile, I'm ready to bet. You won't get into
that dome to trace your line. You'll have to go around and
pick up beyond."

"Is that feasible?" Stile asked his technician serf.

"Not feasible, sir. This is a major cable junction. Bil-
lions of impulses have passed through it. We can trace the
stigmata only by setting up at the junction and reading the
routing there."

"Needle in a haystack," Stile said.

"Sir?"

"Never mind. I grasp the problem. We Shall simply have
to get to that switchbox."

"That's my bet. Stile," Waldens said. "Let's put a rea-
sonable time limit on it. Shall we say half an hour for you
to get the job done?"

Stile looked at the message-tracing serf. "How long to
pass this junction without impediment?"

170                    juxtaposition

"It is merely a matter of getting to it, sir. The readout is
instant."

Stile looked at MeUon. "How much may I bet?"

'The amount is settled," Waldens protested. "One Idlo."

Mellon was unhappy. "Sir, this is extremely chancy,
incorporating virtually no element of predictability, and
the amount is large. Have you any reasonable expectation
of obtaining permission to enter Citizen Cirtess' dome in
the next half hour?"

"No. But that's not the bet. It's whether I can get the
job done."

"Oho!" Waldens exclaimed. "You intend to go in with-
out permission?"

Stile shrugged. "I intend to get the job done."

"Cirtess has armed guards and laser barriers," another
Citizen said. "Almost every year some foolishly intruding
serf gets fried. It would take a mechanized army to storm
that citadel."

Waldens smiled. "Sirs, I think we have a really intrigu-
ing wager in the making. What do we deem to be the odds
against Stile's success? Remember, he is a canny ex-serf
who recently won the Tourney; he surely has some angle."

"Thousand to one against, for any ordinary person," the
other Citizen said. "Hundred to one against, for a Tourney
winner. And a good chance hell get himself killed trying."

"No, I saw him play," a third Citizen said. "He's a
slippery one. If he thinks he can do it, maybe he can."

"I don't think I can do it," Stile said. "I have to do it.
Forces were set in motion to kill me, and this message is
related. I must ascertain its source."

"Within half an hour?" Waldens asked.

"I suspect that if I don't pass this nexus in that time, I
won't pass it at aU. It is pass-fail right now."

"And you are staking your life on it," Waldens said.
"That makes the bet most interesting. Suppose we give you
odds? We think the chances are one hundred to one
against you; you evidently think you can do it. We could
compromise at ten to one, with several of us covering the
bet."

"That's generous enough," Stile agreed. "Since I have to
make the attempt anyway."

T

Juxtaposition                     171

"Sir, I do not recommend this wager," Mellon said. "I
know of no persuasion you can make to obtain Citizen
Cirtess' acquiescence, and you lack the facilities for intru-
sion against resistance. My expert advice can bring you far
more favorable betting opportunities than this."

"Fifteen to one," Waldens said. "I won't go higher; I
don't trust you to be as naive as you seem." The other
Citizens nodded agreement. Their faces were becoming
flushed; this was the essence of their pleasure. Negotiating
a large bet on a highly questionable issue. Gambling not
merely with wealth but with the deviousness of human
comprehension and intent. They knew Stile had something
in mind, and it was worth poorer odds to discover what his
play would be.

Stile spread his hands in ordinary-man innocence.
"Mellon, I'm sure your way is more practical. But I stand
to win a great deal on this, with these levered odds. If I
lose I'm in trouble anyway, because this intrusion may be
physically hazardous. Wealth is very little use to a dead
man. So I must do it my way this time. One kilogram of
Protonite against their fifteen kilos, half an hour from
now."

"Yes, sir," Mellon said with doleful resignation.

"But no interference from you Citizens," Stile cau-
tioned. "If you give away the show to Cirtess—"

"No cheating," Waldens agreed. "Well watch via a rou-
tine pickup, hidden in the lavatory."

"Thank you." Stile turned to the machine-operating
serf. "Show me how to work this contraption," he said.

"Merely locate it over the line or nexus, sir. It will emit
code lights and bleeps to enable you to orient correctly."
He demonstrated. Stile tried the procedure on the section
of cable under the floor, getting the hang of it. He knew he
would have no trouble, since this was another self-willed
machine, which would guide him properly.

Now Stile turned to one of the betting Citizens who
wore an elaborate headdress that vaguely resembled an
ancient Amerind chief's bonnet of feathers. "I proffer a side
bet, my clothing against your hat, on the flip of a coin."

"How small can you get?" the Citizen asked, surprised.
"I have staked a kilo, and you want my hat?"

172 juxtaposition

"You decline my wager?" Stile asked evenly.

The Citizen frowned. "No. I merely think it's stupid.
You could buy your own hat; you have no need of mine.
And your clothing would not 5t me." The man touched
his bulging middle; his mass was twice Stile's.

"So you agree to bet." Stile looked around. "Does any-
one have a coin with head and tail, similar to those used in
Tourney contests?"

Another Citizen nodded. "I am a numismatist. I will sell
you a coin for your clothing."

Now Stile was surprised. "My clothing has already been
committed."

"I'm calling your bluff. I don't believe you plan to strip,
so I figure you to arrange to win the toss. If you win, I get
your clothing as due rental for the coin."

"But what if I lose?"

"Then I'll give you my clothing, in the spirit of this
nonsense. But you won't lose; you can control the flip of a
coin. All Gamesmen can."

"Now wait!" the headdressed Citizen protested. "I want
a third party to flip it."

"Ill flip," Waldens said. "I'm objective; I'll be happy to
see anyone naked, so long as it isn't me."

Stile smiled. "It might be worth the loss." For the coin-
loaning Citizen was especially portly. "Very well. I will
rent your coin."

"This grows ever more curious," Waldens remarked.
"What is this fascination we seem to share for nakedness
in the presence of Stile's lovely robot mistress?"

"Fiancee," Stile said quickly.

Now the other Citizen smiled. "Maybe we should all
strip and ask her opinion."

Sheen turned away, blushing. This was sheer artifice, but
it startled the Citizens again; they were not used to robots
who were this lifelike. "By God," one muttered, "I'm
going to invest in a harem of creatures like her."

Stile accepted the coin. It was a pretty iridium disk,
comfortably solid in his hand, with the head of Tyranno-
saurus Rex on one side and the tail of a dinosaur on the
reverse. Stile appreciated the symbolism: iridium had been
associated with the extinction of the dinosaurs, and of

Juxtaposition                     173

course the whole notion of coinage had become a figura-
tive dinosaur in the contemporary age. Iridium, however,
remained a valuable metal, and numismatics was popular
among Citizens. He passed the coin over to Waldens.

"How do we know Waldens can't control the flip too?"
another Citizen asked suspiciously. They were taking this
tiny bet as seriously as any other.

"You can nullify his control by calling the side in mid-
air," Stile pointed out. "If you figure him to go for heads,
you call tails. One flip. Agreed?"

"Agreed." The Citizen with the headdress seemed in-
creasingly interested. He was obviously highly curious as
to what Stile was up to.

Stile was sure the Citizen's inherent vanity would cause
him to call heads, as a reflection of self-image, so he hoped
Waldens would flip it tails. The coin spun brightly in the
air, heading for the tiled floor.

"Heads," the Citizen called, as expected. He hardly
seemed to care about the outcome of the bet now; he was
trying to fathom Stile's longer purpose.

The iridium coin bounced on the floor, flipped, rolled,
and settled tails. Victory for Stflel

Stile held out his hand for the hat, and the Citizen with
the coin held out his hand for Stile's clothes. All the rest
watched this procedure solemnly. Even Sheen had no idea
what Stile was up to.

Stile removed his clothing and stood naked, seeming like
a child among adults. He took the hat and donned it,
arranging it carefully to conceal his hair and complement
the lines of his face. Then, with covered head and bare
body, he marched to a holo unit set in an alcove. It was a
small one, capable of head-projection only, available for
emergency use. Any demand by a Citizen was considered
emergency.

"Cirtess," Stile said crisply to the pickup. The device
bleeped faintly as it placed the call. He knew the self-
willed machines were tapping in, keeping track of him
without interfering.

The head of a female serf formed in the cubby. "Sir,
may I inquire your identity and the nature of your call?"

"I am Stile," Stile said, rippling an aristocratic sneer

174 Juxtaposition

across his Ups. "I merely wish to inform your employer
that a line-maintenance crew is about to operate on his
premises. The maintenance is phony, and the crew is other
than it appears. There is nothing wrong with that line. I
believe Cirtess should investigate this matter personally."

'Thank you, sir," the serf said. She faded out.

"Now that's something!" Waldens exclaimed. "You
warned him you were comingi Do you have a death wish?"

Stile removed his hat, but did not seek new clothing. He
took the wheeled machine and started down the hall.

"Ahal" Waldens exclaimed. "Of course he would know
how to emulate a serfl But Cirtess won't let a serf intrude,
either, especially when he's been warned by a Citizen that
something's afoot."

"We shall End out," Stile said. "You may watch me on
the general pickup system to verify whether I succeed.
Serfs, come along." He moved on toward the dome en-
trance.

The Citizens turned on the little holo unit, crowding
around it. Stile knew they would follow his every move.
That was fine; he wanted them to have no doubt.

He led his party to the Circle-Tesseract emblem. Cir-
tess' dome adjoined the main public dome closely; an on-
ground tunnel about fifty meters long extended between
the two. The communication line was buried beneath the
floor of the tunnel.

Two male serfs stood guard at the tunnel entrance.
They snapped to alertness as Stile's party approached. One
barred the way. "This is private property."

Stile halted. "I'm on Citizen business," he said. "I'm
tracing an important message along the communication
line."

"Have you my employer's permission to pass?"

"He knows we're coming," Stile said. "I expect him to
attend to this personally. Now give me room; I don't have
all day." He pushed on by, trundling the machine.

Uncertain, the serf gave way. No mere serf braved the
premises of a Citizen without authorization; this line trac-
ing had to have been cleared. But the other serf was al-
ready buzzing his dome. "Work crew of four claims to be
on Citizen business," he said.




Juxtaposition                    175

Stile walked on, not waiting for the answer. Mellon,
Sheen, and the machine-tending serf followed. They all
knew they could be cut down by a laser at any moment;

Citizens had short fuses when it came to serf intrusions,
and there was a laser lens covering the length of the tun-
nel. But Stile was gambling that Cirtess would investigate
before firing. Why should an illicit crew intrude so boldly
on his premises? Why should there be advance warning?
Wasn't it more likely that someone was trying to make
mischief for a legitimate work crew? But the maintenance
computer would deny that any crew was operating here at
this time, so it was phony. It simply didn't add up, unless
it was a practical joke. In that case, Cirtess would want to
discover the perpetrator. To do that, he would have to
observe the work crew and perhaps interrogate it. It was
unlikely that Stile, himself would be recognized in this
short time; the Amerind hat had completely changed his
face, and in any event, the last thing anyone would think
of was a Citizen masquerading as a serf. At least this was
Stile's hope.

No laser bolt came. Stile reached the end of the tunnel,
passed another serf guard who did not challenge him, and
traced the buried cable on through a foyer and into a
garden park girt with cubistic statuary. The Tesseract
motif, of course; Citizens could carry their symbolic foi-
bles quite far.

In the center of the garden, beside a fountain that
formed odd, three-dimensional patterns. Stile came to the
buried cable nexus. He oriented the machine on it. There
was a buzz; then an indicator pointed to the line leading
away, and a readout gave the coding designation of the
new cable. He had accomplished his mission and won his
bet.

But when he looked up, there was a Citizen, flanked
by a troop of armed serfs. This was Cirtess; Stile knew it
could be no other. "Step into my office. Stile," the man
said brusquely.

So the game was up. Stile turned the machine over to its
regular operator and went with the Citizen. He had not
actually won his bet until he escaped this dome intact with

176                    Juxtaposition

the machine; or if he had won the bet, but lost his life,
what he had gained?

Inside the office, with privacy assured, Cirtess handed
Stile a robe. Stile donned it, together with sandals and a
feather hat. His subterfuge had certainly been penetrated.

"Now what is the story?" Cirtess inquired. "I think you
owe me the truth."

'I'm tracing a two-monfh-old message," Stile said.
Tour personnel would not permit entry to a necessary
site."

"Of course noti I'd fire any serf who let unauthorized
persons intrude."

"So I had to find a way through. It has nothing to do
with you personally; I simply have to trace that message to
wherever it originated."

"Why didn't you tell me this by phone? I am not
unreasonable when the issue is clear, I might have per-
mitted your mission, for a reasonable fee."

"I happen also to need to increase my fortune."

Cirtess nodded. "Could this relate to the several Citizens
who huddle in the serf lavatory, spying on your progress?"

"They gave me fifteen-to-one odds on a kilo of Protonite
that I couldn't make it. I need that sort of advantage."

"So you called me to rouse my curiosity, so my serfs
wouldn't laser you out of hand?"

"Also so as not to deceive you," Stile agreed. '1 do not
like deception, outside the framework of an established
game. You were not properly part of our game."

"So you inducted me into it. A miscalculation could
have resulted in your early demise."

"My life has been threatened before. That's one reason
I'm tracing this message; I believe its source wffl offer
some hint of the nature of my nemesis."

Cirtess nodded again. "And the Citizens were willing
to give better odds because of the factor of danger. Very
well. I appreciate cleverness, and I'm as game for a wager
as anyone. I will let you go without objection if you will
wager your winnings with me."

"But my winnings will be fifteen kilos of Protonite!"

"Yes, a substantial sum. I can cover it, and you must
risk it. Choose your bet now—or I shall see that you lose

luxtaposition

177

your prior bet by not completing your survey. I can legit-
imately destroy your tracer machine."

"You play a formidable gamel" Stile exclaimed. "You're
forcing me to double or nothing."

"Indeed," Cirtess agreed, smiling. "One does not brave
the lion's den without encountering challenge."

Stile emerged from the dome with his crew and ma-
chine, his knees feeling somewhat weak. "I have the data,"
he announced.

Waldens glanced at the indicator on the machine. "So
you do, and within the time limit. You've won fifteen. But
why are you so shaky?"

"Cirtess caught me. He pressured me."

The other Citizens laughed. "Why do you think we bet
against you?" one said. "Cirtess can buy and sell most of
us. We knew you were walking into the lion's den."

"How did you wiggle out?" Waldens asked.

"He required me to bet my winnings with him," Stile
said, grimacing. "That leaves me only one kilo uncommit-
ted, until that bet is settled."

"What is the bet?"

"That is private. It is a condition of the wager that I tell
no one its nature until it is settled, which should be
shortly."

"Ah, I like that sort of mystery. Cirtess must be playing
a game with us, to make up for our intrusion into his
privacy. Very well—111 go for your single kilo. Do you
have any suitable notions?"

Stile considered. "I don't care to bet on this message-
tracing any more. Maybe we can find something discon-
nected." They were walking toward the next cable junc-
tion, guided by the machine coding. It was pointless to
trace every meander of the cable itself when this shortcut
was available. Stile turned a comer and entered a short
concourse between major domes. At this moment there
were no other people in it. "I know! Let's bet on the sex of
the serfs to traverse this passage in the next ten minutes.
That should be a fairly random sampling."

"Good enough," Waldens agreed. "I'll match your kilo,
betting on female."

178 Juxtaposition

"Now wait," the Citizen with the feather hat protested.
He had recovered it after Stile's use. "The rest of us are
being cut out."

"Bet with each other," Stile said. "I am at my present
limit." And Mellon nodded emphatically.

"There's little verve in wagers with other Citizens. You
are the intriguing factor here."

"Well, I'll be happy to hedge my bet," Stile said. "I bet
Waldens that more males will pass, and you that more
females will pass."

"No good. That puts Waldens and me against each
other, in effect. I want you. I want your last kilo."

"AH right," Waldens said. "I relinquish my bet with
Stile. You can have this one."

"Hey, I want to bet tool" the indium coin Citizen pro-
tested, and the others joined in.

"AH rightl I'll cover you all," Feather Hat said. "One
kilo each. I say more females in ten minutes from—mark."

"Good enough," Waldens agreed. "Five of us, including
Stile, are betting you that more males will pass. We all win
or lose with Stile."

Now they waited. For two minutes no one came from
either direction. "Suppose none comes—or it's even?" Stile
asked. He was laboring under continuing tension.

"Then we extend the time," Waldens said. "Sudden
death. Agreed?"

The ofhers agreed. They all wanted a settlement. The
particular bets didn't matter, and the details of the bets
didn't matter; just as long as they could share the excite-
ment of honest gambling.

Then two male serfs came, chatting together. Both went
silent as they spied the group of Citizens in the center of
the concourse. "Proceed apace," Waldens said, and the
two hastily passed by.

A minute later a third serf came, from the opposite
direction. Another male. The feather-halted Citizen
frowned.

Then the pace picked up. Three females passed, two
more males, a female, three more males, and another fe-
male. At eight minutes the score was eight males, five

juxtaposition                     179

females. "Must be a male work shift getting out," Waldens
said, satisfied. "To think I almost bet on the girlsl"

But in the final minute there were two more males and
six more females. As the time expired, the score was ten
males, eleven females.

The feather-hatted Citizen smiled broadly. "I skunked
you alll Five kilosi" He nodded toward Stile. "And I beat
him. Nobody's done that before."

"I lost my kilo," Stile agreed, wondering if he looked as
nervous as he felt. "But there's a question I'd like to ex-
plore."

"Explore it," Waldens said. "We're having fun."

"I notice that the males were ahead, until a sudden rush
of females at the end. Is the estate of any of our number
near to this concourse?"

"Not mine," Waldens said. "But you. Bonnet—yours is
dose, isn't it?"

""It is," the feather-hatted Bonnet replied guardedly.

"And those late female serfs—would they by any
chance be employees of yours?" Stile asked.

"That doesn't matter," Bonnet said. "The wager did not
exclude our employees. All serfs are Citizen employees."

"Ohol" Waldens said. "You signaled your dome and
loaded the dice!"

"Only smart participation," Bonnet insisted. "There was
no bar against it."

Waldens sighed. "No, I suppose not. One must never
accept something on faith, particularly the constancy of
other Citizens. I fell for it; I'll take my loss." The others
agreed, though not pleased; they all should have been
more careful.

Now Stile felt the exhilaration of victory. "As it hap-
pens, I bet Cirtess fifteen kilos that someone would cheat
on this wager. I lost my kilo, but won my fifteen. Right,
Cirtess?"

"Right," Cirtess's voice agreed on a hidden speaker.
<tWell and fairly played. Stile. Let it be recorded: fifteen
for you."

Waldens slapped his knee. "Beautiful! Bonnet won five,
you won fifteen. Even in losing, you won! Your fortune is

180 juxtaposition

now just over thirty kilograms. Stile. You are now a mod-
erately wealthy Citizen."

"Congratulations," Bonnet said sourly. "I believe I have
had enough for the day." Somewhat stiffly, he departed.

"And that was worth my own paltry losses," Waldens
said. "I never liked him much. Still, I suspect he's right.
You have been outmaneuvering us nicely. Stile. I think I
must desist wagering with you, lest I lose my shirt—or all
of my clothing." And the others laughed, remembering the
episode of nakedness. By common consent they dispersed,
leaving Stile alone with his party of serfs.

"Sir, you have taken extraordinary chances," Mellon
said reprovingly. "My expertise has been useless."

"I agree I have pushed my luck," Stile said. "I think it
prudent to turn my winnings over to you for management
now. Do you feel you can parlay them into an even larger
fortune?"

"A thirty-kilogram stake? Sir, with that leverage and
your authority to make selective wagers, I believe I can do
well enough."

"Go to it. I'll refrain from further betting until I consult
with you. Take it away."

"Thank you, sir. Your method is unorthodox, but I must
confess it has proved effective." Mellon turned and walked
away.

"He will work wonders, sir," Sheen murmured.

Unencumbered by the betting Citizens, they proceeded
rapidly to the next nexus, which was in a public workshop
area, and thence to another in a serf park that spread
across the curtain. "Coincidence?" Stile inquired skepti-
cally, and Sheen agreed it was probably not.

They set the machine, and the readout suggested that
the message impulse had been introduced at this nexus.
But this was a closed connection; there was no way to
insert a message here. "It had to have come from the other
side of the curtain," Stile said. Somehow he was not sur-
prised. Much of the other mischief he had experienced had
originated in Phaze.

"You have a friend there," Sheen said. "You will have
to cross and use your magic to trace him down."

"Yes. Only an Adept could have managed this. I can't

Juxtaposition                     181

think which one would have done it." Stile sighed. "Sheen,
I still have a night free, and I shall need my rest. Take me
home."

She took him to the Proton Blue Demesnes, and fed
him and washed him in the manner of serf for Citizen, not
deigning to give the job to the hired staff. She put him in a
comfortable bed over a gravity diffusion screen, so that his
weight diminished. Weariness closed in on him, now that
he had respite from the tensions of the moment. But be-
fore he allowed himself to sleep, he caught her hand and
drew her to him. "You cried for me again today," he
said.

"And you cried again for me."

"Some day, somehow—"

She leaned over and kissed him, and it was as sweet as
any kiss could be. In that pleasure he fell asleep. He
dreamed that he loved her in the off moments as well as at
the stress points—but woke to know that was only a wish,
not truth. He could not do more than marry her.

CHAPTER 9

Source

Stile crossed the curtain in the morning at the site of the
last junction. There was nothing special in Phaze at this
place; it was only the slope of a lightly forested hill. What-
ever had fed the message in was gone. There were not even
any footprints, after two months.

He was the Blue Adept, with potent magic. How could
he apply it to follow this long-cold trail? Wouldn't an
Adept have counterspelled the trail to prevent such trac-
ing?

One way to find out. Stile played his harmonica, sum-




182 juxtaposition

moning his power, while he worked out a spell. Then he
sang: "Make an arrow, point the way, that the message
came that day."

The arrow formed, an illuminated spot like that made
by a light projection. But it rotated uncertainly, like a
compass without its magnetism. Sure enough, a counter-
spell was interfering. There would be no simple, one-step
answer.

However, his power at this spot, now, would be greater
than that of a months-gone Adept. He should be able to
trace the source—if he followed the trail in person, as he
had in Proton. "Give a signal, hot or cold, to make current
what is old," he sang, shaping the detail in his mind.

Now Stile's left side felt warmer than his right. He
turned, and the warmth was on his face. He strode for-
ward—and the effect faded.

He backed up until he felt the heat again. It had fallen
away to his right. He got back on the trail, pursuing it
more carefully—and it led him in a spaghettilike wriggle
that coiled about and recrossed itself frequently. Obviously
the other party had anticipated this approach also, and
had left a tortuous path. It might take Stile a long time to
unravel every wriggle, and the trail could lead into traps.

He decided to let it go for now. He wanted to rejoin the
unicorns and the Lady Blue in plenty of time for the quest
for Clip and vengeance. This message had waited two
months; it would wait another day.

He used a prepared spell to transport himself to the
herd, and stood for a moment in discomfort as he arrived.
He certainly did not enjoy performing this kind of magic
on himself, but he really had no alternative at the moment.

Neysa spied him Erst and trotted over. She would al-
ways be his steed and his friend in spirit. Yet now she did
not prance, for the pall of her brother's fate hung over
her.

She changed to girl-form and made one of her rare
speeches: "The Stallion has news of Clip."

"What kind?" Stile asked tightly.

"He is alive." She shifted back to mare-form.

Stile vaulted to her back, and she trotted him over to the
herd. He embraced the Lady Blue briefly.

juxtaposition                     183

The Herd Stallion awaited him in man-form. "Under
the White Mountains, prisoner of the goblins. We must
strike by night—tonight, ere they suspect."

"Yes," Stile agreed. "Thou and I alone, surgically."

"They will be alert for Adept magic, and will kill Clip
the moment they detect it. Thou canst not employ thy
power until he is safe."

"How am I to save him, then?" Stile asked, frustrated.

"I will save him. Then thou canst get us all out of
danger."

Sffle was uncertain about this procedure, but had to
agree. There was no use going on a rescue mission if his
mere presence precipitated Clip's murder.

"We start now," the Stallion said. "It will be night ere
we reach the mountains. I know an entrance to the goblin
demesnes—but once underground, I will know the way no
better than thou."

Stile had an idea. "Suppose I make a spell to show the
way? Will that continuing magic alert the goblins?"

The Stallion considered. "I know not, but think not. It
is new magic that makes alarm; there are many ancient
spells in the background, ignored."

"I'd better risk it," Stile said. He considered a moment,
then played his harmonica and sang: "A star institute, to
illumine our route."

A pinpoint glow appeared to their north, shedding faint
light on the ground.

"But the goblins will see it tool" the Stallion protested.

"See what?" the Lady Blue asked.

The Stallion smiled. "Ah—others see it noti"

"Others see it not," Stile agreed. "I am not quite as
foolish as I look."

"Not quite," the Stallion agreed, and shifted back to his
natural form, pawing the ground. Stile took the hint and
leaped to his back. This was much more of a challenge
than it had been with Neysa, for the Herd Stallion stood
four hands higher than she and massed twice as much. He
was a lot of animal. Had they not had a clear understand-
ing, Stile's touch on his back would have precipitated an
instant death struggle. It was a sign of the passions in-

184                    juxtaposition

volved and the seriousness of the situation that the un-
tamable Stallion submitted to this indignity.

Immediately they were off. Stile, the most skilled rider
in this frame, suddenly had to hang on, lest he be dumped
like a novice. Evidently some spirit of rivalry remained;

the Stallion wanted him to know that he kept his perch
only by sufferance. Stile had never been on a steed like this
before; the Stallion was the mass of a huge work horse,
but had the velocity of a racer. Stile had originally tamed
Neysa by riding her against her will; he knew he could
never have done it with this steed.

The scenery raced by. Wind tore at Stile's clothing. The
Stallion's hooves pounded on the doubled drumbeat of a
full gallop, and sparks flew up where the hard hooves
struck, but the ride was smooth. The Stallion was not
wasting energy in extra up-and-down motion; he was sail-
ing straight ahead.

The pinpoint star remained fixed at about head-height,
its spot of light brightening to a patch of ground. It slid to
one side sometimes, guiding them around obstructions and
bad footing, so that the Stallion never had to slow to scout
the way. He was able to maintain cruising speed, faster
than that of any horse, and he seemed tireless. As he
wanned up, jets of flame blasted from his nostrils. This
was the way that unicorns cooled themselves, since they
did not sweat; the heat was dissipated from their breath
and hooves.

After a time the ride became routine, then dull. Stile
had nothing to do, since the Stallion knew the way even
without the help of the little star. Stile could have slept,
but was too keyed up; he wanted to rescue and restore
Clip. He could do it, he was sure; his magic could cement
the severed hom and heal the scars of its cutting. The only
problem was getting to the unicorn without triggering the
murder. And getting them all out, thereafter. Meanwhile,
he just had to wait.

"I've been thinking," he remarked. "Art thou amenable
to conversation?"

The Stallion blew an affirmative accordion note. He,
too, was bored by this stretch.

"Thou art a powerful creature," Stile said. "Surely the

Juxtaposition                    185

goblins wffl recognize thee as readily as me. I can be taken
for an elf, but thou canst only be a unicorn, even in man-
form. The snub-hom gives thee away."

The Stallion blew another note of agreement. Unicorns
could change form but retained vestigial horns in all
forms. This was because the hom was the seat of the
unicorn's magic; without it the creature was no more than
a horse, unable to play music or change form. If an alter-
nate form lacked the hom, the unicorn would not be able
to change back to equine form. This was plainly unaccept-
able; the human form was not one any self-respecting
unicorn would care to be stuck in for long.

"Thy dragon-form is no better than thy man-form for
concealment," Stile continued. "True, it could penetrate
the goblin demesnes—but would create great alarm, for no
one ignores a dragon! When thou didst approach Clip, the
little monsters would surely realize thy nature and intent."

"Um," the unicorn noted with a thoughtful chord.

"The thing is, thou art in all thy forms a mighty crea-
ture. Now this is no bad thing and ordinarily is altogether
proper." The phrasing of a suggestion was sometimes more
important than the suggestion itself, particularly when ad-
dressed to a creature of pride. "But this time I wish thou
didst possess an insignificant form, like Neysa's firefly, that
I could carry in unobserved."

The unicorn ran on, considering. After a time he blew a
new note. "Could." The notes were not really words, but
pitch and inflection conveyed definite meaning, and Stile
could usually interpret them when he put his mind to it.

"Thou hast a fourth form?" he asked, surprised. "I
thought three was the limit, and only one or two for
some."

Now came a proud blast. This was no ordinary unicorn;

the Stallion could master a fourth form, if he chose.

"That's great!" Stile exclaimed. "Couldst thou work it
up in time for tonight? I know it takes a considerable act
of discipline to implement a new form, and there is so
little time—"

The Stallion was not foolishly optimistic. Any form was
a challenge the first time, and a fourth one was special.
But he thought he could manage it.

186                    Juxtaposition

They discussed it as the miles and leagues rushed by. It
developed that some forms were easier than others. Diffi-
culty varied according to the necessary specialization and
the change of size. Thus a unicorn could convert to a
massive bear fairly readily, because the size was about the
same. A man-form was harder, because the mass was less
and because of the necessary specialization of the hands
and voice. A man-form that could not tie a knot in string
would not be very good, and one who could not talk
would be worse. These things had to be done properly, or
were not worth doing at all. Neysa's firefly-form was a
greater achievement than Clip's hawk-form, because the
fly was only a fraction of the mass. Neysa weighed about
850 pounds in her natural form, about 85 in her girl-form,
and less than 85-hundredths of an ounce in firefly-form. It
would be more than twice as hard for the Herd Stallion to
get down to that size.

"But such size would be beyond suspicion," Stile re-
marked. "No one would believe that a beast as noble as
thou couldst hide in a form so small." That accented the
magnitude of the challenge, rather than the insignificance
of the form.

Then there was the problem of flying, the unicorn ex-
plained in concerned notes. Flying was a specialization
that had to be mastered by tedious practice, after the
physical form had been achieved. The Stallion had learned
it for his dragon-form, but would have to start all over for
an insect-form, since insects employed a different mode of
flight. That could lake days.

"Oh, I did not mean thou must fly," Stile said. "It is the
insignificance I am after, that none may suspect thee.
Thou couldst go from dragon to roach, for that."

Roach! the Stallion blasted, affronted. NeverI

But Stile was struck by something else. Dragon—roach.
His poem: the one he had used to win the Tourney in
Proton. Had this provided him with a prophetic key?

Now he thought back, discovering parallels. He had
referred to Gabriel's horn—but there was also the uni-
corn's horn. Clip's hom had precipitated this venture. He
had also referred to trying to cheat fate; but he had won

Juxtaposition                    187

his biggest bet because of cheating by another Citizen.
How far did this go?

How far, indeed! The first four lines of that poem had
matched his recent experience, deliberately. Then the key
word: silence. And he had been struck by the silence-spell.
Then love; and he had become betrothed to Sheen. That
was not love, precisely, but related; she certainly wanted
and deserved love.

In fact, those key words aligned beautifully with his
experience—almost like a prediction of the Oracle. Yet the
words had become the random product of the Game
Computer. No magic therel So it must be coincidence. It
was possible to make seeming sense of almost anything, as
those two poems had shown. Still—

Why not? Stile decided to go for it. "That is one form
no goblin would suspect. The nether passages must be
overrun with roaches. What Herd Stallion would go to the
enormous effort to achieve so lowly a form? It is beneath
consideration—therefore the safest of all forms for the
accomplishment of such a hazardous mission."

"Um," the Stallion blew, heeding the logic but not the
aesthetics.

"Actually, some roaches are quite elegant," Stile com-
mented innocently. "When I was a serf in Proton, I had to
deliver a horse to the dome of a Citizen who specialized in
exotic creatures. He had a roach farm with some quite
beautiful specimens. I remember some deep red ones, huge
and sleek—surely the royalty of roaches. And others were
frilly, like butterflies, only without wings—"

"Enoughl" the unicorn snorted. He veered to a tight
copse of trees and slowed. When he stopped inside. Stile
was glad to dismount; they had been traveling for hours,
and he was cramped and hungry and suffered the urgent
calls of nature.

There was a convenient nut tree in the copse—unicorns
generally had good taste about such things—so Stile could
eat without using magic. There was also a small spring.
This was really an oasis, probably known to every wild
creature. There was a real advantage of traveling with
such an animal—not only protection, but also the con-
venience of familiarity with the terrain. Stile had now

188                    Juxtaposition

traveled with three unicorns—Neysa, dip, and the Herd
Stallion—and this aspect was the same with each one. Stile
had always liked horses; he knew he would always like
unicorns better.

He had dreamed for more than fifteen years of becom-
ing a Citizen of Proton, perhaps setting up his own racing
stable. Now he was a Citizen—and all he really wanted
was to stay here in Phaze, on any basis. He liked magic—
not merely his ability to perform it, but more importantly,
the very framework in which magic existed. He liked the
verdant hills, the little streams, the various features of this
irregular landscape. He liked the whole sweet outdoors,
with its fresh air and unpredictable weather and feeling of
freedom. Oh, there were horrors here—but even so, it was
a better world than Proton. Three centuries of unrestricted
development and narrow exploitation had destroyed the
environment of Proton, so that comfort now existed only
within the force-field domes. Stile liked civilization, but,
after encountering Phaze, he feared it was at too great a
price.

Stile became aware of a warm sensation on the left side
of his face. Oh, yes—his spell to trace the sender of the
message that had brought him Sheen was still in operation.
Old spells never died, and faded away only slowly—which
inertia was fortunate, since any given spell was effective
only once. The warmth was faint, indicating that he was
far from the source, but at least he could still trace it
down. He would do so the moment Clip was safe.

He heard a musical groan, as of someone stepping on an
accordion. The Stallion writhed, shimmered—and shrank
to a gross, many-legged lump of flesh.

A spell leaped to Stile's lips. But he choked it back,
realizing that this was not a magic attack. It was the
Stallion's effort to master a new form.

Stile ambled over, peering down at the grotesque carica-
ture of a roach, "Now that is the ugliest insect I've ever
seen," he remarked. "But certainly the biggest." Indeed, it
was almost the size of a man.

The monstrous bug waved its feelers, thrashed its legs
about, and blew a furious peep from the miniature horn

Juxtaposition                     189

on its snout. Then it swelled rapidly into Stallion-form
again, snorting fire from the effort.

"Oh, it's thoul" Stile exclaimed innocently. "I was about
to step on it."

The Stallion glared and gave a snort that singed the
hairs of Stile's arms. Then he tried again. This time he got
the size right, but not the shape. He became a miniature
unicorn. "I'm afraid that won't do," Stile said around a
mouthful of nuts. "The goblins know that's not a normal
'corn size."

The Stallion re-formed, pawing the ground. Obviously
he was putting forth terrific effort; his hooves were begin-
ning to glow red, and wisps of smoke rose from his ears.

A third time he tried. This time he got it right—normal-
sized roach, with a silvery body and golden head. The bug
took one step—and exploded back into the Stallion. He
just had not been able to hold it for more than two sec-
onds.

"Maybe you'd better let it rest a while," Stile suggested.
"Give your system time to acclimatize to the notion. We're
not at the goblin demesnes yet."

The Stallion played an affirmative chord. Stile conjured
ten pounds of fine oats for the equine repast, then stood
abashed. He should not have used his magic here. But it
seemed no one had been paying attention; maybe that was
not the kind of spell the enemy was looking for. In due
course he remounted, and they were off again. The strength
of this unicorn was amazing; having run for hours and
struggled to master a difficult new form, he was, after this
brief respite, galloping at unreduced speed. Neysa and
Clip were good unicorns, but neither could have main-
tained this velocity so long.

By nightfaB the grim White Mountains were near. The
Stallion had been moving toward them at a slant, north-
west, circling the demesnes of the ogres. No need for any
ogre trouble, this tripl Actually, Stile had settled with the
ogres, establishing that he was not their enemy, but ogres
were not too bright and there could still be trouble.

Now the sun was dropping below the horizon. The Stal-
lion galloped along west, parallel to the mountain range,



190                    Juxtaposition

then stopped. Stile saw the guiding star to their north,
showing them to the entrance to the goblins' somber
nether world.

But the region was guarded. Goblins patrolled the cliff-
like fringe of the mountain range. How could they get
in?

Stile had the answer to that. He was larger than a gob-
lin, but close enough so that some stooping in the dark
should enable him to pass. He scraped up handfuls of dirt
and rubbed it over his face and arms, then removed his
clothing and coated his bare body too. Goblins wore little
clothing; Stile's Proton underpants sufficed for a costume.
Goblin feet and hands, however, were far larger than his
own, while their limbs were shorter. Stile experimented
and finally fashioned a framework for each foot from
small branches and dirt, making his extremities seem gob-
lin-sized. He did the same for his head. Magic would have
been much easier for disguising himself, either physically
or by means of illusion, but he did not dare use that here.
He was facile with his hands and knew how to improvise;

his head was actually expanded by a gross turban fash-
ioned from his former clothing.

"Grotesque," the Herd Stallion said, eyeing Stile in man-
form. "The human shape is ugly enough to begin with, but
thou hast improved on it."

"Just do thine own shape-change," Stile said. "And keep
it stable."

"I can but try," the Stallion said grimly. He shifted back
to 'corn-form, gathered himself, and phased down to bug-
form. This roach was not handsome, but it did seem to be
stable. Stile watched it take a step, moving all its legs on
one side, followed by those on the other side. The thing
trembled and started to expand, then got hold of itself and
squeezed back into bug shape. It seemed it would hold.

Stile put down his open hand. The roach hesitated, then
crawled on, moving clumsily. It evidently took special co-
ordination to handle six legs, and it was hard for the
Stallion to do this while hanging on to this awkward little
size. Perhaps it was like juggling six balls in the air while
walking a tightrope. As it happened. Stile had done such
tricks in the past—but it had taken him time to master

Juxtaposition                     191

them. "Just don't lose control and convert to equine form
on my head," Stile murmured as he set the roach on the
framework he had wound there. "Don't drop anything,
either."

The roach, catching the reference to droppings, began
to shake with laughter. It expanded to triple roach size,
emitted several little sparks, wrestled with itself, and re-
covered control. Stile decided not to make any more jokes.

The darkness was almost complete now. Stile nerved
himself and walked forward, following the flash of light
projected on the ground by his little guiding star. He
hunched down as well as he could, making himself hump-
backed and shorter. Stile was an experienced mimic, and
this was another Game talent that served him in good
stead now. He walked like a goblin, swung his arms like a
goblin, and glared about like a goblin. Almost, he began to
hate the world the way a goblin would.

The dark hole of the cave entrance loomed close. Stile
shuffled boldly toward it. But a goblin guard challenged
him. "Where the hell art thou going, dirtface?"

For an instant Stile's heart paused. But he had to as-
sume that goblins normally insulted each other, and that
the guard did not realize that Stile's face really was con-
cealed by dirt. "What the hell business is it of thine, stink-
rump?" he demanded in the grating tone of a goblin, and
pushed on. He felt the Stallion-roach quaking with sup-
pressed mirth again, enjoying the exchange.

Apparently it had been the right answer. The guard did
not stop him. Stile followed his little star into the cave.

Goblins were coming and going, but none of these chal-
lenged him. Stile walked downward, through narrow aper-
tures, along the faces of subterranean cliffs, and across
dark chasm cracks. The star made it easy, unerringly guid-
ing him through the labyrinth. What might have taken him
hours to figure out only took minutes. He wondered pass-
ingly how this worked; more than mere energy was in-
volved when magic provided him with specialized informa-
tion. Amazingly soon he came to a deep nether passage
barred by solid stalactitic columns.

The star moved on to illumine what was beyond. It was
a horse.




192 Juxtaposition

No—not a horse. A dehorned unicorn, so grimed that
his natural color hardly showed, standing with head hang-
ing, bedraggled, evidently lacking the will to live but un-
able to die. Clip!

Stile heard a tiny accordion-note snort near his ear. The
roach was seething. No unicorn should be treated like

this!

Half a dozen armed goblins guarded the unicorn. Four
were leaning against the wall; one was drinking a swig of
something foul, and the sixth was entertaining himself by
pricking Clip with the point of his spear. The forlorn
unicorn hardly even winced; he seemed beyond the point of
resistance and did not make a good subject for teasing.
Blood streaked his once-glossy blue coat from prior cuts,
and his mane was limp and tangled. Flies swarmed, yet his
tail hardly twitched to flick them off.

Stile heard the roach on his head breathing hard, with
accordion-chord wheezes. The Herd Stallion suffered no
one to treat a member of his herd this way, and was in
danger of exploding again. "Nay, Stallion," Stile whis-
pered. "Thou must hold form until thou dost get inside.
Neither I nor any of thine other forms can pass these bars
mechanically; they are too strong and tight. Go inside,
warn Clip, then take action against the guards before they
strike."

The Stallion blew a low note of agreement. Stile put his
hand to his head, and the roach climbed on it. Stile set the
roach on the floor in the corner near the bars.

"Hey—who art thou, rockhead?" a goblin guard cried.

Uh-oh. He had to distract attention from the roach, lest
a goblin spot it and idly step on it. The Herd Stallion was
vulnerable in that form, and could not shift quickly
enough to counter an abruptly descending foot.

"I just wanta see the creep," Stile said. "I heard you got
a horsehead in here without a horn."

"That's none of thy business," the goblin snapped. "No
unauthorized idiots allowed. That specifically means thee."

The roach was now crawling uncertainly along the wall.
Obviously it wasn't used to clinging to vertical surfaces,
but didn't want to get stepped on. Progress was slow, so
Stile had to stall longer.

Juxtaposition                    193

"Oh, I do have business here, mucksnoot," Stile said,
and of course that was the truth. "I have come to take the
'corn away."

"Thou art crazy, manfacel We have orders to kill this
brute as soon as our armies finish massing and the enemy
Adept be trapped. He's not going anywhere."

So they weren't going to let dip live, regardless of
Stile's response. And they expected to trap Stile himself.
This was a straight kidnap-hostage-murder plot. No honor
among goblins!

The roach, overhearing the dastardly scheme, lost its
footing and fell to the floor with a loud-seeming dick
and whoosh of accordion-breath. Stile was afraid it would
attract attention. It lay on its back, six legs waving, trying
to recover its footing. Oh, no!

"Thou art not up on the latest, foulfoot," Stile said
sneeringly. "You guards will be executed before the host-
age is." This, too, he intended literally.

His certainty daunted the goblin. Apparently such be-
trayals did happen in the nether realms. "Aw, whatcha
know about it, gnarltoes?" the goblin blustered.

The roach had finally straggled to right-side-up position,
with tiny musical grunts. Any goblin who paid attention
would immediately catch on that this was no ordinary
vermin! Stile had to keep talking.

"I know a lot about it, mandrakenose. That 'corn's the
steed of an Adept, isn't it?"

"Sure, smarty, and that's why he ain't dead yet. To keep
that Adept off our backs till he's out of the picture. We
got Adepts of our own, but they don't like to tangle with
each other, so we're keeping this one dear this way. The
fool likes animals. We're just doing our job here; no rea-
son to wipe us out." He looked at Stile uncertainly. "Is
there?"

The roach had finally reached Clip. Stile relaxed. Just a
few more seconds, and it would be all right. "How about
what that other Adept thinks? Once he knows thy part,
he'll come for thee—and what other Adept would breathe
a spell to help thee?"

But as he spoke. Stile saw Clip lift a forefoot, eying the
roach. He was about to crush it, not realizing its identity.




194                    Juxtaposition

"Clipl" Stile called. "Nol"

Then things happened one on top of another. All six
goblin guards whirled, scrambled, and looked up, depend-
ing on their starting positions, to orient on the homless
unicorn. The magic roach let out a chord and scuttled
away from Clip's poised hoof. Clip's head jerked about, his
ears rotating to cover Stile.

"It's a trickl" the goblin nearest Stile cried. 'This creep's
been bugging me about the hostage. Kill himi"

It wasn't clear whether he referred to Clip or to Stile. It
hardly mattered. The alarm had been sounded.

Two goblins thrust their spears at dip. One stomped at
the roach. The one nearest Stile poked his spear through the
bars to skewer Stile. The remaining two set up a scream

for help.

Clip suddenly animated, swinging his hom about to
skewer a goblin. But he had no hom, only the truncated
stump. The goblin was merely brushed aside by Clip's nose
and struck out with a homy fist.

The roach skittered out of the way and began to expand
like a demon amulet that had been invoked. Stile dodged

the spear.

In moments the Herd Stallion stood within the prison
chamber, stomping his hooves, snorting fire. His hom was
not truncated. It blurred as it lunged at one goblin, then at
a second and a third, before any could flee. Three goblins
were lifted into the air, skewered simultaneously on that

terrible spike.

Clip charged the goblin who was poking at Stile, crush-
ing the creature's head with a blow of a forehoof. But the
two others were running down the far passage, too narrow
for the unicorns to follow, crying the alarm.

Stile readied a spell, but paused. So far he had not used
magic and, now that he knew there was an enemy Adept
involved here, he did not want to give himself away one
second sooner than necessary. The goblins did not know it
was the Blue Adept who was in their midst, so the other
Adept might not know, either—until Stile gave himself
away by using magic.

But now there were two unicorns in the prison, and the
main goblin mass was stirring in the bowels of the moun-

Juxtaposition                    195

tain. The Stallion could use his roach-form to escape—but
Clip could not change form without his hom. Stile could
change Clip's form for him—but that meant magic of
Adept signature. Stile could also melt the bars away with
magic, if they were not of the magic-resistive type. That
must have been how Clip was brought here; the enemy
Adept had spelled him through.

If he had to use magic, he might as well tackle the most
important thing first. How he wished discovery had been
delayed a little longeri "Clip—here to me!" he called,
bringing out the thing he carried like a spear. It was Clip's
severed hom.

The unicorn stared, almost unbelieving. No doubt he
had thought the hom destroyed.

"My power can restore iti" Stile said, holding the hom
out, base first.

Clip came and put his head near the bars. Stile reached
through, setting the hom against the stump. "Restore the
hom of this unicorn!" he sang, willing the tissue to merge,
the thing to take life again.

It was hard, for he had not intensified his power by
playing the harmonica, and the horn was magic. It resisted
Stile's magic, and he knew the two parts were not mending
properly. He was grafting on a dead horn. Meanwhile, a
phalanx of goblins appeared in the passage behind Stile,
bristling with spears. Stile saw them from the corner of his
eye but could not release his hands from the horn, lest the
slow healing be interrupted. Clip could not move, either,
for he was on the other side of the bars waiting for the
healing.

But the Herd Stallion was free. He launched himself at
the bars. "No!" Stile cried in alarm, knowing the stone was
too strong for the animal to break. But the Stallion shifted
in midair to roach-form, sailed between columns, and
shifted on Stile's side to dragon-form.

The dragon spread his wings, banked about, and fired
forth a horizontal column of flame that seared the oncom-
ing goblins. The stench of burnt flesh wafted back. Stile
felt sorry for the goblins, then remembered how they had
treated Clip, and stilled his sympathy. The creatures of the
frame of Phaze conducted their business violently, and




196 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 197

goblins were among the worst. Stile continued to concen-
trate on the healing, letting the Stallion guard him, and
slowly the two parts of Clip's horn melded together. Stile
felt the living warmth creep along the length of it, animat-
ing it. Soon all would be well.

A horde of goblins poured in from the far side of the
prison. "Stallion!" Stile cried, and the Herd Stallion turned
about, charged the bars, shifted into and out of roach-
form, and appeared on the other side in dragon-form
again. Another burst of flame seared out, cooking more
flesh.

But greater trouble was gathering. Stile could feel the
rumble of the march of many feet as hundreds or thou-
sands of goblins closed in, traveling in unseen neighboring
passages. He knew he had alerted the enemy Adept, for he
had performed Adept magic; that would further complicate
the situation. Still he held on to the horn, waiting for the
final inch to be restored to life so that Clip's full capacity
would return. He would settle for nothing less.

There was a puff of fog. The White Adept stood beside
Stile. Her hair was white, matching her eyebrows, and a
sparkling white gown bedecked her somewhat stout form.
"So it is thee. Blue, as we suspected," she said, her voice
and gaze cold as ice. "Thou didst take the bait." -

"I took it," Stile agreed grimly. He was not really sur-
prised; his relations with the White Adept had always been
chill. But why was she involved with the goblins? "I got
tired of getting ambushed by the likes of thee." Would she
tell him anything before making her move? If she started a
spell-diagram before he was finished with Clip's horn, he
would be in trouble; he would have to defend himself, for
without him the unicorns could not escape. But White
could have generated a spell that acted at a distance in-
stead of facing him directly. Maybe she wanted to talk.

The Herd Stallion turned from his endeavors, leaving a
pile of scorched goblins rolled up like dehydrated bugs,
and saw the witch. He braced for renewed action.

"Caution," Stile called. "She's Adept."

The mighty animal stood still. He knew better than to
attack an Adept in a situation like this. He also knew that

Stile was not finished with Clip. For the moment it was an
impasse.

"I can not attack thee directly. Blue," the White Adept
said. "And thou canst not attack me. Yet can our minions
make mischief."

"Agreed," Stile said. "But why has mischief been made?
I sought none."

"Abate thine onus for the moment and hear me out,"
she said. "Blue, I would reason with thee."

In Stile's experience, those who claimed to want to rea-
son with others were apt to have cases that were less than
secure. Still, it was better to talk than to fight. Now at last
Clip's horn had healed. Stile let go, and the unicorn
backed away, blowing an experimental saxophone note. It
was off-key, but strong. His coat seemed to be brightening
under the grime; he had been restored to the joy of life.

The White Adept had known what Stile was doing, and
had not interfered. She had to be serious about her sub-
ject, and Stile seriously wanted to know what this was all
about. "Give thy word there will be no attack by Adept or
goblin without fair warning," he said. "No treachery."

"I give it. Blue." There was a faint ripple in the air
about her.

He had to accept that. Truth animated the very atmo-
sphere and substance of Phaze. Adepts did not get along
well with each other, but they honored the deals they
made. "Then I will hear thy reason."

"Thou knowest that the end of Phaze draws nigh," she
said. "The Purple Mountains have shaken, the Fore-
ordained is on the scene, the Little Folk mass as for war,
and portents abound."

"Aye," he agreed. "They tell me I am involved. Yet all I
sought was to honeymoon with my wife. Someone set
traps for me, and one trap setter resembled thee."

"Merely to warn thee off," she said. "Thou art Adept
and perhaps the strongest of us all. Thou hast suffered
much, yet thou shouldst be the leader in our effort instead
of opposing it."

"What effort?" Stile's interest intensified.

'To save Phaze."




198                    Juxtaposition

"Of course I want to save Phazel I love this landl I want

to live and die herel"

"But not, methinks, before thy time."

Stile smiled grimly. "I wish not to die here among gob-
lins, true. But I sought no quarrel with goblins. Thou didst
kidnap my steed, and abused him, and forced this quarrel

on me."

"Aye. Unable to strike effectively at thee or at thy Lady,
or to warn thee off, we finally had to take thy steed. It is
not a thing I like. Now thou canst have thy freedom
with our apologies, and thine animals with thee, and lead-
ership in the present order, if thou wilt but accept it."

"Why should I not accept it?" Stile asked, not rhetori-
cally.

"Because thou art prophesied to be the leader of the
forces of the destruction of this order. The Foreordained is
only part of it; thou art the other part."

"Obviously there's a loophole," Stile said. "Aside from
the fact that I have no intention of harming Phaze, thou
wouldst not be pressuring me if thou didst believe my

destiny was fixed."

"There is a loophole. A dead man cannot lead."
Stile laughed ironically. "Kill me? My fate will survive
thine effort, if it be truly set."

"Aye. Fate has indeed charmed thee, unlike thine other
self. But we are not assured thou canst not be killed, only
that if thou dost remain alive in Phaze, thou wilt destroy
it. The charms that preserved thee so cleverly before are
passing. Thou hast already conceived thy son on the Lady

Blue—"

"I have?" Stile asked, surprised.

"—which is why she joins thy former steed and accepts
the protection of the animal herd. So fate no longer pre-
serves thee for that. It preserves her. Still, her feeling for
thee is such that she might not survive thy demise, so thou
art indirectly protected yet. I warned the others of that,
but they heeded me not; they thought they could vanquish
thee before thou didst reach the West Pole."

"They?"
"The other Adepts. We all are patriots in the end. Blue.

We all must needs try to save our land."

Juxtaposition                    199

She seemed sincerel "All the other Adepts are against
me?" he asked incredulously.

"All except Brown; the child wavers. She likes thy
steed."

Stile remembered how Neysa had given the little girl a
ride. It seemed that kindness had paid a dividend. "What
of Yellow?" Stile had had differences with the Yellow
Adept, but recently had gotten along with her tolerably
well. He could not believe she was his enemy.

"Dost thou want it from her own mouth?"

"Aye"

"Then let me bring her here." White made a diagram on
the floor and tapped it three times. A puff of smoke
formed and dissipated, and there stood the Yellow Adept
in her natural hag-form.

"Oh, nol" Yellow exclaimed. "Let me just get changed
for the occasion, my handsome bantam." She brought out
a vial, tipped it to her lips, swallowed—and changed to a
young, ravishingly pretty creature.

"White tells me that thou and the other Adepts think I
will destroy Phaze, so are against me. Yellow," Stile said.
"Can this be true?"

Yellow made a devastatingly cute moue. 'It is close
enough. Blue," she said. "I am not thine enemy and will
not oppose thee—but neither can I join thee, for that thou
art indeed destined to wreak much mischief and overthrow
the natural order."

"How is it I know nothing of this?" Stile demanded.

"The instruments of great events seldom know their des-
tinies," Yellow said. "This prevents paradox, which can be
an awkward complication and a downright nuisance."

"Nuisance, hell! I was attempting to have my honey-
mooni Why should this represent a threat to anyone?"

"Thou didst bring the Foreordained, and then thou didst
travel to the West Pole. These were elements of the proph-
ecy."

"So the other Adepts decided to stop me from getting
there," Stile said, grimacing. "Setting neat little magical
traps."

"Some did. Green chose to stand aloof, as I did, dislik-
ing this. Sure enough, thou didst get there. Now the onrush




200                    juxtaposition

of events is upon us, and if we do not get thee away from
Phaze promptly, we all are doomed."

"So you propose to remove me by lolling me?"

"Nay, we know that would not work," Yellow said. "At
least White and Green and I suspected it would not. Black
and Orange and Translucent did not participate in the
proceedings, and Brown opposed them. We had to sup-
press her, lest she warn thee."

So it now developed that the other Adepts were any-
thing but unanimous; most were at best neutral. That ex-
plained why they had not simply massed their magic
against him. Stile's expression turned hard. "Suppressed
Brown? What dost thou mean by that?"

"A stasis-spell," White said quickly. "No harm was done
her. It is hard indeed to do direct harm to an Adept; the
spell is likely to bounce and strike down the speller. But
slantwise action can be taken, as with the silence and
confinement for thee."

"You froze the child in place?" Stile demanded. "Our
truce is just about to come to an unkind end."

"She would have blabbed to thee," White repeated.

"Now I am blabbing to thee: release her."

White's expression hardened, as was typical of those
whose reason was only a front. Yellow quickly interceded.
"Provoke him not unnecessarily. White; he has power and
friends we hardly know. We need hold Brown no longer. I
shall go free her." She brought out another vial, sipped the
potion, and vanished.

"Methinks thou hast won the heart of more than
Brown," White grumbled. She viewed him critically, not-
ing the mud caking his body and the awkward turban, loin-
cloth, and shoe structures. "It must be thy magic, rather
than thy demeanor."

Stile relaxed marginally. Ugly things were happening,
and he knew it wasn't over. So far there had been attacks
against him, the Lady Blue, Clip, and the Brown Adept.
An organization of Adepts had formed against him. He
needed to know the rest of it. "Let's have it. White. Ex-
actly what is the threat to Phaze, and what dost thou want
of me?" For he knew her suggestion about giving him a

Juxtaposition                     201

place of leadership was wrong; how could he lead, if his
presence meant the end?

"We want thee to leave Phaze voluntarily, so that the
dangers of Adept confrontations are abated. Thou canst
take Lady Blue and aught else thou wishest. Cross the
curtain, embark on a Proton spaceship, and depart for the
farthermost comer of the universe as that frame knows it,
never to return."

Stile had no intention of doing that. Apart from the
complication of the Lady Blue's official nonexistence in
the other frame, where the Records Computer took such
things more seriously than people did in Phaze, there was
the matter of the robot Sheen. How could he marry her,
with his other wife in Proton? And how could he leave his
friends the unicorns and werewolves and vampires? Phaze
was the world of his dreams and nightmares; he could
never leave it. "Nay."

"The applicable portion of the prophecy is this: 'Phaze
will never be restored till the Blue Adept is forever gone.'
Thou canst not remain."

"I have had some experience with misrepresented pre-
dictions," Stile said. "Restoration of Phaze after my depar-
ture is hardly synonymous with my destruction of it—
which I maintain is no intent of mine. Thou hast answered
only a fraction of my question, and deviously at that."

"I am getting to it. Blue. The goblins guard an ap-
paratus from the other frame, protecting it from all threats.
The end of Phaze will come when that device is returned.
The goblins guard it blindly from harm; we would prefer
to destroy it."

"So the collusion of Adepts with goblins is rife with
internal stress," Stile observed. "Doubtless the goblins
know not of this aspect."

"Doubtless they suspect, however," White said.

"Surely the massed power of the Adepts can prevail
against mere goblins," Stile said, pushing at her verbally.
"Any one of us could enchant the entire species of goblin
into drifting smoke."

"Thou might. Blue. Few others could. But this device is
a special case and can not be attacked directly."




202 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 203

"Anything can be attacked!" Stile said. "Some things
with less success than others, though, as seems to be the
case when Adepts attack Adepts."

"Nay. This device is what is called in the other frame a

computer."

"A computer can't operate in Phazel No scientific de-
vice can." Except, he remembered, near the West Pole.

"This one has a line running to the West Pole."

Parallel thoughts! "Maybe. If it could figure out how to
use magic in its circuits."

"Aye. It functions partially, and has many thoughts.
Some concern thee—which is why we did not wish thee to
make connection with it at the Pole."

"How canst thou know this if the goblins let thee not
near it? In fact, why do the goblins allow Adepts in their
demesnes, seeing the likes of thee would destroy what they
endeavor to guard from harm?"

"The goblin-folk are not unduly smart," she said with a
fleeting smile. "But smart enough to keep Adepts away
from the device. They cooperate with us to some extent
because they know that we oppose thee—and thou art
one who will take the contraption from them and return it
to Proton-frame, where it seems it will wreak all manner
of mischief on both frames. So it is an uneasy alliance, but
it will do. All of us. Adept and goblin alike, wish to save
Phaze."

"And I wish to destroy Phaze," Stile said. "Or so you
other Adepts choose to believe. Because of some fouled-up
prophecy. No matter that I love Phaze; you believe that
not."

"Nay, Blue, this one is not distorted. Thou wilt return
the thing to Proton and thereby destroy Phaze, and only
thy departure can alleviate that."

Stile was annoyed by this insistence. There had to be
some flaw in the logic. "How dost thou know the prophecy
is true?"

"The computer itself made it."

"And what relevance can the guess of an other-frame
contraption have? Thou dost credit it with the accuracy of
the Oraclel"

She nodded, and Stile's mouth dropped open." Oh, no!"
he exclaimed.

"It is so," she affirmed. "The computer is the Oracle.
That is how it defends itself from the likes of us. Any
thrust we can conceive against it, it anticipates and foils.
Its means are devious but effective. We dare not attack it
directly."

"Now let me back up," Stile said. "Thou didst offer me
peace and fortune in Phaze, then told me I have to get out
of Phaze forever or be killed, so that I won't destroy it.
Surely thou perceivest the contradiction. Where is the lie?"

"Nay, Bluel" she said. "We Adepts differ some amongst
ourselves about our manner of dealing with thee, so there
may be seeming contradictions. It is a fair offer—it thou
dost but accept it. Cooperation or exile. We fear thou wilt
not."

'Try me. White."

Her glance played across the cavern, indicating the uni-
cqms and goblins, all waiting for the settlement of Adepts.
"Needs must we have greater privacy than this," she said.
"Thy spell or mine?"

"Mine," he said. He played a bar of harmonica music,
then sang: "Give us a globe that none may probe." And
about them formed an opaque sphere that cut off all ex-
ternal light and sound.

In a moment light flared, as the witch made a spell of
her own. "Now before we suffocate," she said, "I'll give it
to thee without artifice. We want thee to destroy the Ora-
cle. Only thou canst do it, for thou art its tool. It will
admit thee to its presence, if thou canst get somehow past
the goblins, and thy power is great enough to do the deed.
Destroy that evil machine. Blue, and Phaze will be saved.
This is the loophole we dare not voice aloud. Only if it
returns operative to Proton can it act to destroy Phaze,
and it can not foresee its own demise. Do this. Blue, and
all other prophecies are null; we then shall have no onus
against thee, and thou canst govern in Phaze."

"Thou art asking me to betray a—a consciousness that
trusts me," Stile said, disturbed. "That has never been my
way."




204 Juxtaposition

"Agreed. Thou hast ever been honorable. Blue, which
is why I trust myself to thy power here. It is no fault in
thee that causes us to oppose thee; it is only that it is in
thy power to save or finish Phaze. Save our land and suffer
our gratitude; try to destroy it and suffer our opposition;

or vacate the frame so that we have no need to fear thee.
These are thy choices. Blue. Thou knowest our determina-
tion; we are fighting for our lives and world. We are not
limited by thy scruples, and our massed magic is stronger
than thine. Thus united, we can attack thee directly. Op-
pose us not gratuitously."

It was a fair ultimatum. But Stile found he could not take
the easy way out. "I love Phaze," he repeated. "I want
never to leave it. In addition, I am now a Citizen in Pro-
ton, with considerable wealth. I shall not sacrifice my
place in both frames by forever departing the planet. That
leaves me with two choices: join thee or oppose thee. I
know nothing of these prophecies thou dost speak of. Why
should I try to destroy a device that has done me no
harm?"

"No harm!" she flared, her white hair seeming to darken
and melt with the heat. "Thou trusting fool! That device
killed thee once and imperiled thy life again by setting us
against thee."

"That last I perceive," Stile agreed. "Yet the business of
the Oracle is making prophecies and being correct. If I am
to be the leader of the forces of destruction of Phaze by
helping this computer to return to Proton—though the rea-
son remains opaque as to why it should wish ill to Phaze
or how it could harm this frame from Proton—and some-
one inquires about that, the Oracle can but answer truth-
fully. Naturally that imperils me, and I like it not—but
neither can I fault it for that answer. Truth is often un-
pleasant. Rather should I inquire in what way I am to do a
deed whose nature appalls me. Were I sure the Oracle
would destroy Phaze, I would not help it, and surely it is
aware of that. There must be circumstances I know not
and that you other Adepts know not. Better that I at least
talk with the Oracle to ascertain the rationale."

"Of course," she said. "That is thy sensible response,

Juxtaposition                     205

and surely the machine is expecting thee to come to it.
That makes it possible for thee to destroy it."

"Or to help it to destroy Phaze," Stile said wryly. "At
the moment I intend to do neither evil, and can not see
what rationale would sway me either way."

"Then consider this. Blue. It was the Oracle who hinted
at the doom of the Red Adept and started her mischief
against thee. She killed thine other self and attacked thee
in Proton—but it was the Oracle who motivated her. If
thou dost seek vengeance for the murder of the Blue
Adept, seek it at the source—the infernal Oracle. This is
no sweet contraption like thy golem mistress. Blue. It plays
the game savagely."

"But all its predictions were truel" Stile protested, ex-
periencing a trace of doubt. "I can not blame it for fulfill-
ing that role!"

"Fool! dost thou not realize it was a self-fulfilling proph-
ecy? Red attacked thee because the Oracle fingered thee,
no other reason. The Oracle knew what would happen. It
alone generated that murder—and knew that also."

Stile was shaken. He was conversant with the bypaths of
logic. White was right; the Oracle had initiated the cam-
paign against him. A lesser entity might have made a
mistake, but the Oracle had to have known what it was
doing. It had murdered Stile's other self, caused Stile's
knee misery, and set him on the horrendous path he had
followed on the way to Phaze and to vengeance against the
Red Adept.

Yet he remembered also that the original Blue Adept
had accepted his own murder. Why?

"But why should the Oracle do this to me?" he asked
plaintively, seeking to resolve this part" of the mystery.
Maybe if he knew the Oracle's motive, he could fathom
his alternate self's strange acquiescence. His mind was,
after all, identical.

"I suggest thou dost go ask it," White said. "Ask also
why it should seek to use thee to destroy Phaze. Then
must thou do what thou shalt see fit to do."

It all did seem to add up, at least to this incomplete
extent. He had to settle with the Oracle. "I will go ask the
machine and then do what I see fit to do."




206                    Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

"I meant that facetiously," the White Adept said. "We
do not believe the computer will allow thee to approach it
unless it knows thou wilt side with it. I have made our
case to thee, but thou hast not reacted with proper fury.
Something we know not of has influenced thee against

us."

The knowledge of his other self's acquiescence—that
was the influencing factor. '"Of course I am not with thee!"
Stile exclaimed. "I am not with anyone who kidnaps and
dehorns my steed. Thy methods make thy side suspect."

"And the methods of the Oracle make it not similarly

suspect?"

Stile spread his hands. "I admit I know not the final

truth. I will seek the Oracle."

"I did not think thou wouldst join us. But I undertook
to make the case. Hadst thou accepted honestly—"

"I have done nothing dishonesti"

"Aye. So we must destroy thee. Yellow will not like
that, but it must be done. When we leave this bubble, it
will be war between us. The other Adepts have massed
their power, and the goblins are ready."

"Fortunate art thou that thy trust in this truce was well
placed. Else would I simply confine thee here."

"Honor is not a luxury many of us can afford," she said
sadly. "Yet in the name of honor, some are fools. Thou
wilt not attack us or the Oracle without fair warning. This
makes thee ideal for whatever side can use thee." She
sighed. "I do not hate thee. Blue. I respect thee. I, too, am
true to my cause, and it is a worthy one. Thou art true
only to thine honor, and therein lies thy grief. Phaze will
never be safe whilst Blue remains. Thus says our enemy
the Oracle, and this we do believe. We like it not, but so
must it be. Be on thy guard against my kind. Blue."

Stile studied her. The White Adept was no young thing,
and she had not bothered with Yellow's type of vanity. She
looked old and ugly and careworn. He had encountered
her before and found little to please him. But he knew
she was a witch and a skilled one; backed by the power of
the other Adepts, she was far more formidable than she
appeared. Her warning had to be heeded. The Adepts
would now be fully unified and coordinated. The veil was

juxtaposition                     207

off; nothing would be held back. She was giving him the
most forceful warning she could, without betraying her
associates.

He would have to get away from here in a hurry, the
moment the shell opened. Yet where could he escape to?
The Adepts could follow him anywhere in Phaze. White's
warning, perhaps, was intended to focus his attention on
this problem so that he would have a fair chance. His
respect for her had been small; now it had enlarged. She
had taken pains to give information that he needed, when
she really hadn't had to. "I thank thee for thy courtesy,
White," he said.

Stile released the spell that enclosed them and stood on
guard. If the witch tried to strike against either unicorn,
Stile would counter the spell. By the same token, if he
started magic against the lurking goblins, she would block
it. Since no spell could be used twice, it was sheer waste
for Adept to squander magic against Adept. Their special
powers would cancel each other out—until the other
Adepts oriented—and she had told him they were ready.
He was outgunned and would have to move fast so that
they could not keep proper track of him.

"We must travel!" Stile cried. "I must stave off magic;

you two handle the rest!" He vaulted aboard the nearest
unicorn, which happened to be the Herd Stallion.

Clip was now outside the prison, probably having
shifted to hawk-form to pass by the bars. That meant he
was back in full health. But Stile was happier riding the
Stallion, whom he knew to be in full possession of his
powers. Clip might tire quickly.

The Stallion blasted out a medley of chords. Goblins
had appeared in the passage; they hastily faded back, heed-
ing the warning. Clip went to hawk-form and flew ahead,
leading the way. The Stallion launched himself forward.

Stile was only peripherally aware of these details. His
attention was on the White Adept. As the Stallion moved
out, she started drawing a symbol in the dust on the floor.
Stile sang out a spell that was mostly in his head: "Dust—
gust!"

The dust stirred up into a cloud, gusting about the cav-
ern. The witch was unable to complete her sketch. Her




208 juxtaposition juxtaposition 209

spell had been intercepted. She could not function any
better in this swirl than Stile could when he had been a
victim of the silence-spell. She looked up—and Stile saw
with surprise that she was smiling. It was as if she were
glad to see him escape. She must have spoken truly when
she said she did not like this business. She had to fight
him, but didn't really mind failing. Some Adepts, it seemed,
were not as bad as others.

However, he had to heed her warning about the other
enemy Adepts, most of whom he had never interacted
with. They would not hold back, once they got around
White's tacit obstruction and oriented directly on him.

Meanwhile, the goblins were bad enough. These were
their passages, and they were thoroughly conversant with
the dusky recesses. The Herd Stallion was retracing the
route they had descended—but suddenly a great iron gate
slammed into place ahead, blocking the way. The Stallion
could not pass and Clip barely squeezed back through
the narrow aperture to rejoin them. They were caught in
the passage, and a solid mass of goblins was wedging in
behind them.

The Stallion played more chords. Clip, answering the
command, shifted to man-form and joined Stile on the
Stallion's back. He was clothed now, with a rapier. He
drew this and faced back, menacing a few goblins who
tried to squeeze in behind.

Stile got the idea. He unwrapped his concealed broad-
sword and sat ready to slice at any goblins who got within
range to either side. His main attention was on whatever
signs of hostile magic there might be, but he could slash
while hardly looking.

The Stallion charged the goblins. They scattered, throw-
ing their spears away in their frantic scramble to get clear.
It was not that they were cowardly; it was that a ton of
unicorn bristling with hom and two armed riders was a
truly formidable thing. Any who tried to stand their
ground would be skewered or slashed or trampled. As it
happened, a number could not get out of the way in time
and were indeed trampled and skewered.

There was a side passage. The unicorn hurtled into this,

causing Stile to grab for the mane in order to hold his seat,
and thundered along it.

Suddenly there was a ledge. The Herd Stallion could not
brake in time. He leaped out over the edge, into the dark-
ness of nothing.

Then Stile found himself riding the dragon. The Stal-
lion's dragon was not large for this type, being perhaps
only twelve feet long from snout to tail, and Stile's weight
bore him down. Fortunately Stile was not large for his own
type, and the dragon was able to spread his wings and
descend slowly. Clip, of course, had converted to hawk-
form.

Stile still wore his grotesque shoes and turban. Quickly
he sloughed these off, lightening the burden on the reptile;

but the descent continued.

The dragon snorted fire that illuminated the cavern.
They were in a deep cleft whose upper reaches were lit by
wan shafts of moonlight. There was their escape!

But the dragon could not make it that high under Stile's
weight. Stile readied a spell, felt the questing magic of
another Adept, and had to hold back. He could be messed
up much as he had messed up White's spell, and in midair
that could be disastrous. Also, it seemed the enemies could
not quite locate him as long as he remained in the dark
and cast no spells. He had to hold off until it was safer. So
the dim light above faded, and they dropped down into the
deeper depths silently.

There was a detonation of something. Light blazed and
metallic fragments whistled by. Someone had fired an ex-
plosive amulet or something similar at them. This was
blind shooting, hoping to catch the dragon by a random
shot; the assailants did not have a perfect fix on Stile's
party. Now he was certain that if he used defensive magic,
he would give away his location. Better to lie quiet, like a
submarine on a water planet, and hope the depth-charges
missed.

The dragon tried again to rise, but could not. Stile felt
the body heating with the effort. This could not continue
long.

There was a pop behind them. The Stallion-dragon




210

Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

211

turned his head to send back a jet of flame—and the light
showed a griffin, an eagle-headed lion, the next enemy
Adept sending. "Uh-oh," Stile murmured. "Can't hide
from that."

But the Stallion was burning hot from his exertions. He
looped about, aimed his snout at the pursuing griffin, and
exhaled a searing shaft of fire.

The griffin squawked as it was enveloped in flame. The
blaze of its burning wings lit up the entire cavern. It tum-
bled down to the water, smoking feathers drifting after

it.

But the next sending was another dragon, a big one. Its
chest pumped like a bellows, building up pressure for a
devastating blast that would incinerate Stile and the Stal-
lion. The enemy was now fighting fire with fire.

The hawk winged at it, too small and fast for the
dragon to catch or avoid. The dragon ignored the bird,
knowing nothing that size could dent its armored hide.
The enormous metal-foil wings beat swiftly, launching the
dragon forward.

The hawk dived, zeroing in on the dragon's head. Stile
could only watch with dismay, knowing Clip was throwing
away his life in a useless gesture, a diversionary effort that
was not working. He could not even think of a preventive
spell on this too-brief notice.

The dragon opened its monstrous mouth to take in the
tiny missile—and Clip changed abruptly to unicorn-form.
He struck horn-first, piercing the dragon's head, his horn
passing from inside the throat right on between the eyes
and out, penetrating the little brain on the way.

The strike was so unexpected and powerful that the
monster simply folded its wings and expired. It plummeted
to the water, while Clip changed back to hawk-form and
flew clear. "Well donel" Stile cried, amazed and gratified.

Now for a time there were no more sendings. But Stile
knew worse attacks were in the offing. His party had to get
out of the chasm—and could not. Already they were close
to the nether water. He had to relieve the Herd Stallion of
his weight—yet was sure that the one enchantment the
enemy Adepts would have blocked would be a personal

transport-spell. They were trying to force Stile to use it—
and launch himself into oblivion.

The Stallion sent forth more fire, just enough to light
the way. The dark water below reflected with slight irides-
cence, as if oily. Stile mistrusted that. He didn't want the
Stallion to fall into that liquid. He would have to risk
magic. Not transport, of course; something unexpected.

The hawk had been circling. Now he came back,
squawking news. Over and over he cried it, until Stile was
able to discern the word. "Curtain!" Stile cried. "The cur-
tain is ahead?"

That was it. Now Stile had a better alternative. "Fly
low. Stallion, and I'll pass through the curtain. Then thou
and Clip can fly up and escape in the night. They want
thee not, only me, and soon thou canst return to thy herd.
I'll climb up on the Proton side, where magic can't reach
me." Of course there would be other problems across the
curtain, but he would handle them in due course.

The Stallion was in no position to argue. He glided
low—and there in the dark was the scintillation of the
curtain, crossing the chasm. "If there's any sort of ledge—
I don't want to drop too far."

There was no ledge. It would have, to be the water. They
intersected the curtain, and Stile spelled himself across.

CHAPTER 10

Force

He fell a few feet—or rather a meter or so—knowing he
was through the curtain only because he no longer had
dragon support. He splashed into the water, feeling the
instant shock of cold. He was, of course, an excellent




212

, Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

213

swimmer; no top Gamesman neglected such a sport. But
tfae water was polluted, stinldng, and perhaps contained
harmful acids; the Citizens of Proton cared nothing for the
planetary environment outside the domes. He didn't want
to stay here longi

The air, too, was foul. But here in the depths, it was
thicker than above and seemed to contain more oxygen.
He did not enjoy it, but he could survive longer on it than
anticipated. Still, he had another resource.

He swam back to the curtain, which passed right down
through the water. He organized himself, then willed him-
self through and said: "Bring nuts and dried fruit, scuba
and wetsuit." And the spell, shaped by his imagination,
clothed him in a warm, flexible body swimming suit com-
plete with flippers, breathing apparatus, and a bag of
mixed nuts and bits of dehydrated fruit.

Something formed in the water near him. It was huge
and toothed, and it threshed its way toward him with
powerful flukes. Stile hastily spelled himself back across
the curtain. He had done the unexpected and escaped the
enemy Adepts without using a transport-spell, but they
remained alert for him.

His new equipment went with him. This was one way in
which magic and science juxtaposed; he could create or
fetch scientific devices by magic in Phaze and take them
across for use in Proton. Now he was comfortable in the
water and had concentrated food to sustain him. He could
get where he was going.

Only—where was he going? He wanted to locate that
computer—but where was it?

Again, no problem. He prepared himself and passed
through the curtain. "Weapon and gem, doslem doslem,"
he sang, grabbed the two objects that formed, and dodged
back to Proton before the massive crunch of a hostile spell
could catch him. The enemy would never have expected
him to conjure these particular items! He saw the Adept
attack through the curtain—a blaze of light silhouetting
massive jawless teeth, closing and disappearing as they
intersected the demarcation of the curtain. A demon from
the deeps, indeedl Technically an indirect attack, a send-

ing, but surely fatal to whatever it caught. They were not
playing innocent games, these enemy Adepts!

Now he had what he needed. He could stop playing
peekaboo through the curtain, especially since one more
trip across it would probably get him crunched. The
enemy had targeted him too closely; his scant leeway had
been used up. Now he could get where he was going—on
the Proton side of the curtain.

He swam, holding the straps to his last two acquisitions
in his teeth. The flippers enabled him to move rapidly
through the water. He didn't need light; he could tell
where the walls were by the lapping of the waves his
swimming made.

The chasm narrowed, until he was swimming between
vertical walls only a couple of meters apart. Still no way up
or out. He didn't like this; his special equipment was
sealed in watertight packages, but he needed to get on dry
land to use it safely.

Well, he could dive. He had a hunch there was a way
out of here and a way from here to the computer-Oracle,
because the goblins needed access to guard it. Of course
this was the other frame—but with the normal parallelism,
chances were good there were Proton passages too. All he
had to do was find them.

He dived. He did not fear any monsters in this murky
lake; they could not survive in this pollution. But he was
careful about sharp jags of rock that might tear his suit.

The deft was wider below, giving him more room to
grope along. He should have conjured a light; he hadn't
thought of it. On any venture, something important was
always forgotten! But one of his instruments had an oper-
ating light that he could use for general vision—once he
put it into use.

The walls closed in above. Good—he did have a passage
here, for there was a slight current. Soon he groped up-
ward and discovered a new cavern—and this one had slop-
ing sides that he could scramble up on, getting free of the
water.

Perched awkwardly on the rock, for his bad knees pro*
vented him from squatting, he opened one of his doslems.




214

Juxtaposition

juxtaposition

215

This one was the weapon: Disrupter-Optical-Space-Light-
Modulatoi. D 0 S L M. He set it on low and activated it.
There was a faint, humming, beam, and a section of the
cave wall glowed and sagged, melting without heat. Its
particles had been disrupted, losing their cohesion; solid
had turned to liquid. Good enough. The doslem was gov-
erned by light-beam computer, in which beams of light
functioned in lieu of solid circuitry and semiconductor
diodes and information chips. It was much more compact
than the solid state and could generate potent effects, as
the melted patch of wall showed.

Now Stile turned to the other doslem, the gem. In this
case the D stood for Detector. It was an even more mar-
velous instrument. A miniature panel controlled its as-
sorted functions of timing, direction, and detection. In his
hands it emitted just enough light to clarify the cave-
region in which he hunched, and it gave readouts mapping
the extent of air-filled and water-filled recesses. There were
other caves here, and some were within the range of the
disrupter; he could melt a hole through the thinnest sec-
tion of wall. Some passages were squared off—obviously
artificial. His hunch had proved correcti

Stile checked for refined metals, orienting on copper,
aluminum, iron, and gold. Soon he located a considerable
cache of these, southeast of his present location. He
checked for magnetism and found it in the same region.
This certainly seemed to be the computer, or whatever
portion of it existed in the frame of Proton.

Stile scouted about, then selected the thinnest wall to
disrupt. He gave the melt time to settle, then stepped
through to the adjacent cave. He was on his way.

It took time, and on occasion he rested and ate from his
supply of nuts and fruit. He located reasonably fresh water
by tuning in on it with the detector. He had a sense of
location; he was in the cave network whose upper exits he
and the Lady Blue had noticed on their honeymoon, after
departing the snow-demon demesnes. He marched, cut
through to a new passage, and marched again, slept, and
marched again. He hoped the two unicorns had flown up
and out of the cavern system, knowing that he. Stile, could
take care of himself on the other side of the curtain. There

was no way to communicate with them now, since he was
no longer near the curtain. They simply had to have faith.

At times, as he tramped onward, he thought about the
nature of the curtain and the parallel frames. How was it
that he could so readily conjure scientific equipment that
was inoperative in Phaze, yet was operative when taken
back across the curtain? If it was that solid and real, why
couldn't it function in Phaze? If it was not, why did it
work here? The curtain could be a very thin line indeed,
when magic so readily facilitated science. Was there no
conservation of energy with regard to each frame? Any-
thing taken across the curtain was lost to its frame of
origination, wasn't it? Also, how could objects of Proton-
frame design be brought to Phaze? Did his magic generate
them from nothing, or were they actually stolen from
warehouses and factories and hauled through the curtain?
He doubted he could visualize the inner workings of a
doslem well enough to build one directly, so doubted he
could do it by magic, either—but the alternative implied a
doser connection between frames and greater permeability
of the curtain than conventional wisdom supposed. Magic
would have to reach beyond the curtain, right into the
domain of science. There was so much yet to learn about
the relationship of frames!

And this computer he was searching out—had it really
murdered Stile's alternate self, the original Blue Adept, by
means of a self-fulfilling prophecy? Why? How did all this
tie in with the approach of the end of Phaze and Stile's
own involvement in that? Was the computer-Oracle due to
perish in that termination of the frame, and Stile him-
self—

He paused to review what had been more or less idle
speculation. If Stile was going to help destroy Phaze, and
the computer was in Phaze, it might indeed be destroyed
too. So maybe it sought to prevent him from participating
in this business. Maybe it was really on the same side as
the other Adepts. So it had generated mischief to eliminate
him in both frames, being foiled only by that other mes-
sage, the one that had brought Sheen to protect him. Yet it
had been prophesied that he would help the computer
return to Proton, where it would act to destroy Phaze; that




216                    Juxtaposition

put him on its side and set it against the Adepts. Maybe
the destruction of Phaze was inevitable, and the computer
needed to cross to Proton in order to escape the holocaust.
But then why should it have tried to kill him twice? That
made no sense at all.

Maybe he should have taken the time to trace down the
source of that mysterious, other message, the one that had
saved him, before he rescued Clip—

No. Clip came Erst. The Adepts had hurt the unicpm to
gain leverage against Stile, and Stile had had to act.

Should he resume tracing that message now, instead of
going to confront the Oracle? He might have a powerful
ally—and with most of the other Adepts against him, he
needed one.

But that would mean backtracking to the curtain and
fighting his way through the barrage of hostile magic di-
rected against him. He could not be sure he would survive
that, and certainly he could not thereafter approach the
Oracle with any element of surprise. Only by staying with
the Proton-frame route, where magic and prophecy did
not exist, could he hope to sneak up on it. He was set on
his present course; he would have to continue.

He plodded on, and the hours passed. Was it day or
night above, now? Normally he had a good time sense, but
he did need some minimal feedback to keep it aligned.
Stile also had good endurance, having run marathons in
his day, but now he was traveling mainly in the dark, with
occasional sips of oxygen from his scuba gear, conserving
that life-sustaining gas as much as possible. He was out of
food and tired. Only the constant approach to the site
indicated by his equipment gave him conEdence to keep
on. Maybe he should have gotten himself a device to sig-
nal Sheen, who could have come to pick him up, making
things so much easier. How obvious this was, now that he
had ample time to think of it!

Yet that would have alerted others to his activity. Since
other Adepts had connections in Proton—indeed, some
were Citizens—that could be just as dangerous for him as
activity in Phaze. So maybe this way was best; they might
think him dead or impotent, since he did not reappear.

juxtaposition                    217

Sometimes accidents and mistakes were the best course;

they were at least random.

The detector signaled him; he was at last drawing close
to the metal and magnetism. He hoped this was what he
believed it was; and if it weren't, he would have to struggle
to the surface and hope he could make it to a dome. His
oxygen was very low; he knew he was nowhere near the
curtain; he was also deadly tired. The shortage of oxygen
had sapped his strength. He doubted he could survive if
this site were not what he sought. He had in fact gambled
his life on it.

The passage did not go to the site. Stile had to use the
disrupter again. The wall melted and he stepped through.

He had entered a dusty chamber. Machinery was in it.
The detector indicated that electric current flowed here.
He turned up his light and examined the machinery. Im-
mediately he suffered the pangs of disappointment. This
was no computer; this was an old construction robot,
equipped to bore and polish a tunnel through rock. The
magnetic field was from a preservation current, to warm
key lines and maintain the valuable robot brain in opera-
tive condition despite long disuse. There were other con-
struction machines here, similarly parked and preserved. It
was cheaper to mothball equipment for centuries than to
rebuild it at need. Obviously the computer had been
brought here, then passed through the curtain to Phaze
long ago.

Something nagged at Stile's mind. There was a discon-
tinuity. What was it? He felt worn in brain as well as in
body, but as he concentrated he was able to force it to the
surface of consciousness. His ability to do this was one of
the things that had brought him to his present position as
Citizen and Adept. When he needed to be aware of some-
thing, he could grasp it in time for it to be of use. Usually.

It was this: the curtain was not here. It was at least a
full weary day and night's march northwest of here. There
was no way the computer could have been set across here.
The curtain was fairly stable; if it moved, it did so very
slowly. Centimeters per century, perhaps, like the drifting
of continents.

218 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 219

Still, that offered a possible explanation. Maybe the cur-
tain had moved, perhaps in random jumps that were now
forgotten, and several centuries ago it had been here. So
the computer had been put across, and stranded by the
retreat of the curtain.

How, then, could he be fated to put the computer back
across the curtain? The computer was surely far too mas-
sive for him to move, even if the other Adepts permitted
it—which they would not. Stile was not at all sure he
cared to make the effort. If the computer-Oracle was his
enemy, why should he help it move to Proton to wreak its
vengeance on Phaze? So much remained to be clarified
before Stile could decide what side of what situation he
was on.

First, however, he had to figure out how to survive.
There should be some small emergency supplies of food
and oxygen here, for maintenance workers who might get
stranded. There might be a storeroom. Maybe even a
communication line to civilization, since there was a live
power line.

He checked around, his mind growing dull as his scant
remaining oxygen thinned. He had rationed it to reach
here; now it was gone. He stumbled from machine to
machine. No oxygen, no supplies.

The cave narrowed. There was a door at the end. It was
an air-lock type of portal—a likely storeroom or pres-
surized office complex. He needed to get in, but it was
sealed. Should he use the disrupter? Two problems there:

first, the chamber might be lined with disrupt-resistant
material, making it impervious to the attack of this small
weapon; second, if he did break in, and there was air
pressure, that pressure would decompress explosively. Not
only could this be dangerous to him physically, the process
would eliminate the very thing he had to preserve—normal,
oxygenated air pressure.

-He tried to open the lock, but could not; the controls
were keyed to particular identities or particular code se-
quences, and he was not the right person and didn't know
the code. No help for it; he would have to try the dis-
rupter, hoping to find canned air to use with his suit

Then a voice came: "Identify yourself."

There was someone in therel Or at least a sapient robot.
"I am—" He paused. Should he give his true identity?
Caution prevailed. "A person in need of air. I beg assis-
tance."

"You shall have it. Be advised that a robot weapon is
trained on you."

"So advised." Stile leaned against the wall, growing
dizzy as the last of his scuba oxygen faded.. He could not
blame a solitary maintenance guard for being careful.

The portal hummed, then opened. Air puffed out. A
figure emerged, dothed in the protective gear of a main-
tenance worker, using a nostril mask and protective gog-
gles.

"Stile! It's you!" the figure cried. "God, what a reliefl"
The man put his arm around Stile's shoulders to help him
into the chamber.

It was Clef, the musician Stile had encountered in the
Tourney, and to whom he had given the Platinum Flute.
The Foreordained. "I thought you were in Phaze," Stile
gasped as the air lock sealed and pressure came up.

"I was. Stile. Or should I say sir? I understand you
obtained your Citizenship."

"I got it. Don't bother with the 'sir.' Just give me air and
food and a place to rest. What are you doing here?"

The inner aperture opened, and Clef guided him into a
comfortable chamber. "I'm here to meet you. Stile, on
behalf of the Oracle. You and I must work together to
fulfill the prophecy and save the frames from destruction."
He pressed a cup of nutri-soup into Stile's unsteady hands
and set him in an easy chair. "I was so afraid you would
not make it. The Oracle said there was danger, that no one
could help you, and that it could not foresee your arrival.
Its prophecies are unreliable when they relate to its own
destiny. I had no notion when and if you would arrive,
except that it had to be within a three-day time span. I
fear I was asleep when the moment came. Then I could
not be certain it was you, for there are enemies—"

Stile ceased his gulping of the soup to interrupt Clef.
"Enemies? To save the frames? I understood I was to
destroy Phaze, and I don't know whether that makes me
friend or enemy to whom."




220

juxtaposition

juxtaposition

221

Clef smiled. "That depends on how you see it. Stile. The
present order will be overturned or greatly weakened in
both Proton and Phaze. That's why Citizens and Adepts
oppose the move. Most of the rest—the serfs and creatures
—will beneEt by the new order. You are no enemy to
theml"

"Viewpoint," Stile said, catching on. "To an Adept, the
loss of power of Adepts would be disaster, the end of
Phaze as he knows it. To a unicorn, it might be salvation."

"And to a werewolf," Clef agreed. "Big changes are
coming. It is our job to make the transition safe. If we
don't, things could get extremely ugly."

Stile was recovering as he breathed the good air and
ingested the nourishment of the soup. He started to strip
off the wetsuit, all that had protected him from the chill of
the cave passages. This chamber was like a slice of Heaven,
coming so suddenly after his arduous trek. "Tell me
everything."

"It's simple enough. Three hundred years ago, when
they discovered that this planet was one of the occasional
places in the universe where the frames of science and of
fantasy intersected—would you believe Planet Earth was
another such place in medieval times?—they realized that
there were certain dangers in colonizing the fantasy frame.
So they set up some powerful instruments for the purpose
of securing an optimistic new order. A sophisticated self-
willed computer and a definitive book of magic."

"A book of magic? I never heard of this."

"Well, you weren't supposed to. It contains the most
potent spells in all modes, so that it would take years for a
single person to invoke them all—not that anyone would
want to. Spells of creation and destruction, of summoning
and sending, of healing and harming. Any person with
access to that book in Phaze would become an instant
Adept, more powerful than any other, one who could vir-
tually change the face of the frame in minutes. The com-
puter contains all the data for science, finance, economics,
and politics known at the time. Despite the passage of
three hundred years, this knowledge is enough to assure
the operator enormous power in Proton—perhaps enough
to dominate the government."

"And someone is destined to get hold of these tools and
turn them to wrong use? That could indeed be troublel"

"No, great care was taken to safeguard against this dan-
ger. The two tools had to be preserved for the time when
they were needed, and kept out of the hands of those who
might squander or abuse them. They had to be ready for
the great crisis of separation."

"Separation?"

"It seems the intersection of frames is a sometime thing.
The elves who instructed me are not sure about that. As
you know, they consider me to be the one they call the
Foreordained, which simply means my particular talent
will be useful in negotiating the crisis; there is nothing
religious or supernatural about it. So they have been pre-
paring me in a cram-course, while you have diverted the
Adepts who might otherwise have interfered."

"So that's what I was doing. I was a decoyl"

"That's only part of your task. Anyway, they think the
frames are going to separate, so there will be no more
crossings, no further interactions. This is simply part of
the natural order; it happened on Earth as the medieval
period ended. After it, no one in Proton need believe in
magic, and no one in Phaze need believe in science, and
the episode of the interaction of the systems will seem like
fake history. Since on this planet the fantasy frame was
colonized from the science frame—though a number of
Phaze creatures are evidently native to the fantasy realm,
and perhaps the Little Folk too—er, where was I?"

"The frames are separating," Stile said.

"Ah, yes. When they do, the human alternative selves
will be carried away, becoming complete in themselves,
clones of their counterparts, and parallelism will no longer
exist."

"Now that's another thing," Stile said. "I can see how
the presence of people in one frame could generate similar
people in the other frame, split by the curtain. With sci-
ence overlapping magic, that sort of thing can happen. But
after the initial ripple, why should it continue? I did not
exist three hundred years ago; why should there have been
two of me?"

"Again, the Little Folk aren't certain. It seems that




222

juxtaposition

juxtaposition

223

when the experts made the computer and book of magic—
two aspects of the same thing—they were able to juxta-
pose the frames. Science and magic operated in each, for
the two were the same. Then the frames separated slightly,
and each person and creature separated too. This was an
unexpected occurrence; before that, there had been only
one of each. It was as if the fantasy frame, vacant of
human life, picked up a duplicate copy of each person in
the science frame. It did not work the other way, for no
dragons or unicorns appeared in Proton, perhaps because
it lacked a compatible environment. Already the mining of
Protonite was commencing, with attendant use of heavy
machinery, construction of processing plants, and pollu-
tion of the environment. The Citizen class put things on
what they termed a businesslike footing at the outset, per-
mitting no pollution controls. There is evidence that magi-
cal creatures are extremely sensitive to environmental
degradation; only a few, like the trolls, can endure it for
any length of time. The Citizens of Proton simply put up
force-field domes and continued their course unabated,
ignoring the outside planet. In this manner Proton lost
whatever it might have had in nature, sacrificed by the
illiterate pursuit of wealth. But despite this gross difference
between the frames, parallelism persisted; people tended to
align. In fact, parallelism is the major factor in the present

crisis."

"That's what I really want to understand," Stile said.
"The frames may separate, but I don't see why that should
destroy them unless, like Siamese twins, they can't exist
apart."

"They can exist apart. To make the problem clear, I
have to clarify parallelism. It's not just people; the entire
landscape is similar. A change made in one frame and not
in the other creates an imbalance and puts a strain on the
entire framework. Dig a hole in the ground in Proton, and
the stress won't be alleviated until a similar hole is made in
Phaze. Unfortunately there is no natural way to do that,
so the stress continues to build. Eventually something will
snap—and we are now very close to the snapping point."

"Ah, I see. Like damming a stream—the water builds
up behind and falls away on the other side, until it either

spills over or breaks the dam. And we don't want the dam
to burst."

"Indeed we don't. So we have to find a way to alleviate
the pressure. We don't know what will happen if the
frames equalize in their own fashion, but it would prob-
ably wipe out most of the inhabitants of both frames."

"So we need to fill holes and drain waters," Stile said.
"Seems simple enough."

"Not so. Not so at all. You reckon without the human
dynamics. You see, the major imbalance, the largest hole
in the ground, literally, is from the mining of Protonite.
This is displacing huge quantities of material, creating a
substantial physical imbalance, and worse yet—"

"Protonite," Stile said. "In the other frame it's Phazite
—the source of the energy for magic."

"Exactly. That makes the problem critical, and the so-
lution almost prohibitively difficult. The Citizens are not
about to stop mining Protonite voluntarily. Not until every
last dreg of it is gone, like the original atmosphere. Pro-
tonite is the basis of their wealth and power. If it were
only sand, we could arrange to transfer a few thousand
tons from one frame to the other, relieving the unbalance.
But as it is—"

"But if that much Protonite, ah, Phazite were trans-
ferred out, to restore the balance, what would happen to
the magic?"

"It would be reduced to about half its present potency.
The Oracle has calculated this carefully. The power of the
Adepts, who are the main users, would diminish accord-
ingly. They would not be able to dominate Phaze as they
do now."

"That might not be a bad thing," Stile said. "And the
Proton Citizens—"

"Their mining would have to be severely curtailed, per-
haps cease entirely. They would have no renewal of their
present resources. The galaxy would have to discover new
sources of energy."

"But the galaxy depends on Protonitel Nothing matches
iti There would be phenomenal repercussionsi"

"Yes, that is why taking action is difficult. Civilization
as we know it will have to change, and that will not




224 juxtaposition

occur easily. Yet the alternative, the Oracle says, may be
the complete destruction of this planet—which would also
cut off the galaxy's supply of Protonite."

"I begin to comprehend the forces operating," Stile said.
•The end of Phaze and Proton is approaching, and we
have to do something. But both Citizens and Adepts would
oppose the cutoff of Protonite mining and the transfer of
Phazite, because without free use of this mineral their
status suffers greatly. That's why the Adepts are after me
now, and think that my elimination will alleviate their
problem; they fear I can do something that will deplete
them all—"

"You can."

"And that's why the self-willed machines knew I would
have to become the wealthiest of Citizens. Wealth is power
in Proton, and I need to be able to withstand the for-
midable opposition of the Citizens when this thing breaks."

"Exactly. You need enough of a voting bloc to tip the
balance in your favor."

So many things were falling into place! "But why, then,
did the computer try to destroy me? I don't want to see
either Proton or Phaze come to harm and I should cer-
tainly work to achieve the best compromise. Why did the
Oracle sic the Red Adept on me?"

"Because only you—and I—can do the job that must be
done. A .man who can cross the curtain freely, who is
powerful in each frame, and who has the ability and con-
science to carry through. A man who is essentially incor-
ruptible without being stupid. The Blue Adept, your other
self, was too limited; he could not cross the curtain, so he
had no base in Proton, no experience with that society. He
had lived all his life with magic; he depended on it. He
would have been largely helpless in Proton during the
crisis."

"So the Grade killed him?" Stile demanded incredu-
lously. "Just because he wasn't perfect? Why didn't the
Oracle select someone else for the job?"

"The Oracle selected you. Stile. You had his excellent
qualities, and you had lived a more challenging life; you
were better equipped. But you could not enter Phaze. So
the Blue Adept had to be eliminated—I do not speak of

juxtaposition                     225

this with approval—in order to free you to cross the cur-
tain. Had the decision gone the other way, you would have
been the one killed, to free him to cross into Proton."

"But the attempt was made on me tool" Stile protested,
shaken by this cold calculation.

"It was blocked in Proton," Clef said. "I knew nothing
of this when I encountered you in the Tourney; believe
me, I was appalled. But you were protected. The Oracle
sent a second message—"

"The messagel" Stile exclaimed. "I was trying to trace
itl_ The Oracle—" But this, too, was coming clear now.
One message to start the murder process, the other to
intercept and nullify part of it. Diabolically effidenti

"Now you have been prepared," Clef continued. "The
computer expects you to organize the juxtaposition and
transfer."

"I'm not at all sure I want to cooperate with this emo-
tionless machine. It has entirely disrupted my life, not
stopping even at murder. What it put the Lady Blue
through, and my friend Hulk—" Stile shook his head.
"This is not the sort of thing I care to tolerate."

"I agree. But it seems the alternative is to let both
frames crash."

"Or so the cynical Orade says," Stile said. "That ma-
chine has shown itself to be completely unscrupulous in
the manipulation of people and events. Why should I be-
lieve it now?"

"The Little Folk believe it," Clef said. "They despise it
and want to be rid of it, but they believe it. It is a ma-
chine, programmed for truth, not for conscience. So its
methods are ruthless, but never has it lied. Its sole purpose
is to negotiate the crisis with minimum havoc, and it
seems that the grief inflicted on you was merely part of the
most rational strategy. It has no human will to power and,
once it returns to Proton, it will serve its master abso-
lutely."

"And who will its master be?"

"You, I think. I am called the Foreordained, but I be-
lieve the term is most applicable to you. Perhaps it was
applied to me as a decoy, to prevent your premature de-
struction." He smiled, appredating the irony. "The Oracle

226                    juxtaposition

prophesies that Blue will govern Proton in the difficult
period following separation of the frames. As you may
have gathered, there is no limit on information when it
deals with me. The computer will help you govern Proton,
and the book of magic will assist the one who takes power
from the Adepts in Phaze."

"And who is that?"

"I can't get a clear answer there. It seems to be you—
but of course you can't be in both frames after they sepa-
rate. I suspect the computer suffered a prophetic short
circuit here. I can only conjecture that whichever frame
you choose to remain in will be yours to govern."

"I want only to remain in Phaze with the Lady Blue and
Neysa and Kurrelgyre and my other friends. Yet I have
already been treated to the prophecy that Phaze will not be

safe until Blue departs it."

Clef shook his head. "I wish I could give you a dear
answer on this. Stile, but I can not. Your future is indis-
tinct, perhaps undecided. It may be because you are the
key figure, the one who will decide it. The uncertainty

principle—" He shrugged.
Unwillingly, Stile had to concede the probable truth of

this complex of difficult notions. Machines acted the way
they were designed and programmed to act—and why
would the experts of three hundred years ago have de-
signed a machine to lie during a crisis? Surely they would
not have. The very ruthlessness that Stile hated was an
argument in favor of the Oracle's legitimacy.

"Where is this book of magic?" Stile asked at last. It
was his grudging, oblique concession that he would have
to go along with the Oracle and perform his part in this

adjustment of frames.
"In Proton, under the control of the Game Computer."

"What's it doing in Proton? No one can use it there."
"That is why it is in Proton. To protect the two tools of
power from premature exploitation and dissipation, the
powers-that-were placed them in the wrong frames. The
book of magic is impotent in the science frame, and the
computer is greatly reduced in power in the fantasy frame.
In order to resolve the crisis, both must be restored to their

proper frames."

Juxtaposition                     227

"So my job is to fetch the book and pass the computer

back through?"

"These tasks are not simple ones," Clef cautioned him.
Stile, of course, had already gathered that. "The book
should be no problem in the acquisition, for the Game
Computer will turn it over to anyone possessing the code-
request. But the Citizens will do their utmost to stop it
from being transported across the curtain. The computer
—that relates to my job. It will cross only as the moving

curtain intersects this location."

"Your job? Exactly what will you do as the Fore-
ordained?"

"I will juxtapose the frames. That is the precondition

for re-establishing parallelism."

Stile shook his head. "Just when I thought I had it
straight, I am confused again. It is my limited present
understanding that the frames are about to separate, but
can't because of the imbalance of Protonite. I suppose
their separation would tear that associated Phazite free
and rupture our whole reality, like a knot pulled through a
needlehole. But we have only to form a ball of Phazite and
roll it across the curtain, where it will become the neces-
sary Protonite. What's this business about juxtaposition?"

"Nice notion, that ball. But you don't just roll Phazite
across the curtain. Phazite is magic; the curtain is really
an effect of that magic, like a magnetic field associated
with electric current or the splay of colors made by a
prism in sunlight. Such a ball might rend the curtain,
causing explosive mergence of the frames—"
"Ah. The dam bursting again."

"Precisely. But you could roll it into the region of jux-
taposition, and then on into the other frame. Two steps,
letting one aspect of the curtain recover before straining
the other. Like an air lock, perhaps." He smiled. "What a
fortune a multiton ball of Protonite would be worth!"

"So you juxtapose the frames. You are foreordained to
perform this task so that I can perform mine. How do you
do this?"
"I play the Flute."
"Music does it?" Stile asked skeptically.
"The Platinum Flute is more than a musical instrument,




228                    juxtaposition

as you hiow. It produces fundamental harmonics that
affect the impingement of the frames. Properly played, it
causes the frames to overlap. The Little Folk have been
teaching me to play the ultimate music, which ranges
within a single note on the audible level, and across the
universe on a level we can not perceive. I have had to
leam more about music than I learned in all my prior life,
for this single performance. Now I have mastered the note.
The effect will be small at first. Toward the culmination it
wffl become dramatic. There will be perhaps two hours
of full juxtaposition in the central zone, during which
period the exchange of power-earth must be effected. If it

is not—"

"Probably disaster," Stile finished. "Yet if that is the
case, why should the Citizens and Adepts oppose it? Of
course they will lose power, but when the alternative is to
lose the entire planet—"

"They choose to believe that the threat is exaggerated.
To return to the dam analogy: some, when the dam is
about to burst, will dislike the inconvenience of lowering
the water level, so will claim there is no danger; perhaps
the sluices will pass water across their properties, damag-
ing them only slightly as the level is lowered. So they
indulge in denial, refusing to perceive the larger threat,
and oppose corrective action with all their power. To us
this may seem short-sighted, but few people view with
equanimity the prospect of imposed sacrifice."

"And there is the chance the Oracle is wrong," Stile
said. "Or am I also indulging in foolish denial?"

"Wrong perhaps in timing; not in essence. No one can
predict the moment the dam will burst, but the end is
inevitable."

"You do make a convincing case," Stile said ruefully.
"When will you begin playing to juxtapose the frames?"

"As soon as I return to Phaze, after garnering your
agreement to manage the transfer of computer, book of
magic, and Phazite."

"Damn it, this computer murdered my other self and
caused untold mischief in the personal lives of people in-
volved with me. Why should I cooperate with it now, or
believe anything it says?"

juxtaposition                     229

Clef shrugged. "You are a realist. You are ready to
undertake personal sacrifice for the greater good, as was
your alternate self, the Blue Adept."

"He knew this?" Stile demanded, remembering how the
man had apparently acquiesced to his own murder.

"Yes. He was too powerful and clever to be killed with-
out his consent. He gave up everything to make it possible
for you to save the frames."

Stile hated the notion, yet he had to believe. And if the
Blue Adept, with everything to Uve for, had made his
sacrifice—how could Stile, who was the same person, do
less? He would only be destroying what his other self had
died to save.

"It seems I must do it," Stile said, dismayed. "I do not
feel like any hero, though. How long before juxtaposition
is actually achieved?"

"Allowing time for me to return to Phaze—perhaps
twenty-four hours."

Time was getting short! "How much Phazite, precisely?"

"The Little Folk will have that information. In fact,
they will have the Phazite ready for you. But the enemy
forces will do all in their power to prevent you from
moving it."

"So I'll need to transfer the book of magic and the
computer first," Stile decided. "Then I can use them to
facilitate the mineral transfer. Since the computer will
cross when the curtain passes its location, I need only to
guard it and establish a line to it. Which leaves the book—
which I'd better pick up before juxtaposition so I have
time to assimilate it. Maybe I can arrange to have some-
one else pick it up for me, since I will no doubt be
watched."

"I believe so."

"Is there convenient and private transport from here to
a dome?"

"Share mine. I am going to the curtain. From Phaze,
you may travel freely."

"If the Adepts don't catch me."

"It will help, I must admit, if you can distract their
attention from me again. With the Flute I can protect
myself, but I would prefer to be unobserved."




230

Juxtaposition

juxtaposition

231

"I suppose so. Somehow I had pictured you as a new
super-Adept, able to crumble mountains and guide the
dead to Heaven."

"I have only the powers of the Platinum Flute you
brought me. I am myself no more than a Ene musician. I
suspect that any other musician of my caliber could have
served this office of the Foreordained. I just happened to
be the nearest available. After this is over, I hope to return
to my profession in my home frame, profiting from the
experience garnered here. The Mound Folk of the Plat-
inum Demesnes are generously allowing me to keep the
Flute. I was, like you, drafted for this duty; I am not
temperamentally suited to the exercise of such power. I am
not an Adept."

Stile found that obscurely reassuring. Clef believed that
this would come out all right. "Very well. Well step across
the curtain, and I'll spell you directly to the Oracle, where
they can't get at you, then spell myself elsewhere in a
hurry." Stile paused, thinking of a minor aspect. "How did
you get by the goblins who guard the computer?"

"One note of the Flute paralyzes them," Clef said, relax-
ing. "You summon your power through music; you should
understand."

"I do." Stile hated to leave this comfortable chair, but
felt he should get moving. "I suppose we've dawdled
enough. Great events await us with gaping jaws."

"I believe we can afford to wait the night," Clef said.
"There is a tube shuttle, renovated for transport to the
curtain; it will whisk us there in the morning. Since no one
knows you're here, you can relax. That will give the
Adepts time to gather confidence that you are dead, put-
ting them off guard."

The notion appealed tremendously. Stile had worn him-
self out by his trek through the caves and tunnels; he
desperately needed time to recuperate. He trusted Clef.
"Then give me a piece of floor to lie on, and I'll pass
out."

"Allow me to delay you slightly longer, since we may
not meet again," Clef said. "We played a duet together,
once. It was one of the high points of my life. Here there
is no magic, so the instruments can safely be used."

Stile liked this notion even better than sleep. It seemed
to him that music was more restorative than rest. He
brought out his treasured harmonica. Clef produced the
Platinum Flute. He looked at it a moment, almost sadly.
"Serrilryan," he murmured. "The werebitch. With this I
piped her soul to Heaven, and for that I am grateful. I
knew her only briefly, but in that time I had no better
friend in Phaze."

"This is the way it is with me and Neysa the unicorn,"
Stile agreed. "Animals are special in Phaze."

"Extremely special." Clef put the instrument to his
mouth, and from it came the loveliest note Stile could
imagine.

Stile played the harmonica, making an impromptu har-
mony. He knew himself to be a fine player, especially with
this instrument inherited from his other self—but Clef was
the finest player, with the finest instrument ever made. The
extemporaneous melody they formed was absolutely beau-
tiful. Stile felt his fatigue ameliorating and his spirit
strengthening. He knew of many types of gratification,
such as of hunger, sex, and acclaim, but this was surely
the finest of them all—the sheer joy of music.

They played for some time, both men transported by the
rapture of the form. Stile doubted he would ever experi-
ence a higher pleasure than this and he knew Clef felt the
same. Flute and harmonica might seem like an odd com-
bination, but here it was perfection.

Then something strange occurred. Stile began to see the
music. Not in the form of written notes, but as a force, a
wash of awareness encompassing their immediate envi-
ronment. It was the shape or essence of a spirit, a soul.
Somehow this vibrant, joyous thing was familiar.

Stile glanced at Clef without interrupting his playing.
The flutist had seen it too; he nodded marginally. Then
Clef's playing changed in nature, and Stile realized that
this was the music that moved souls to their resting places.
Somehow the magic of the Flute was acting in this frame,
moving the spirit in the room.

Whose was it? Not the werebitch's. It hovered in place,
becoming more perceptible. Then the music changed again,
and the spirit disappeared.




juxtaposition

232

Clef abruptly stopped playing, so Stile had to stop too.
"Did you recognize it?" the man asked, awed.

"No," Stile said. "It seemed familiar, but I never saw
such a phenomenon in Proton."

"It was you. Stile. Your soul came out. When I realized
that, I stopped. I don't want to pipe you to Heaven yet."

"Not minel" Stile protested. "My soul was never more
with me."

Clef frowned. "I beg to differ. The Little Folk have
instructed me somewhat in this, as it is an important prop-
erty of the Flute. There are certain keys to the recognition
of souls that the music relates to. The more I attuned to
you, the clearer that ghost became. It was you."

Stile shook his head. "It had to have been my double,
not me."

There was a brief silence.

"You had a double," Clef said. "Your alternate self,
who died to free you."

"The Blue Adept," Stile agreed, awed at the dawning
notion.

"Who piped him to Heaven?"

"No one. He was murdered alone. All that remains of
him is—this harmonica."

"The Flute evokes souls. But only free souls, which
have not yet found their way to their destinations. Could
your alternate's soul—?"

"Be in this instrument?" Stile finished. "You know, he
may have found a way to stay around, not dying com-
pletely. This harmonica came to me fortuitously. Is it pos-
sible—?"

"That he chose to occupy the instrument when he made
room for you in Phaze?" Clef continued.

Stile contemplated the harmonica. "Why? Why avoid
Heaven and be trapped in a harmonica?"

Clef shrugged. "The music that issues from it is lovely.
Is it better than your norm?"

"Yes. I play this better than other instruments, though I
did not play this type until I got this one."

"Perhaps, then, your other self is helping you."

Again Stile considered. "To make sure his sacrifice is
not wasted. Subtly guiding me. He conjured his own soul

juxtaposition                     233

into his harmonica. Surely a feat of magic no lesser person
could achieve. He has been with me all along." Stile sighed,
half in amazement. "Now I must fulfill the destiny he
could not. He is watching me."

"He must have been a worthy man."

"He must have been," Stile agreed. "The Lady Blue said
he had not lived up to his potential. Now it seems there
was more to him than she knew."

They let the matter drop. There was really not much
else to say about it. Clef showed Stile to a cot, and he lay
down and slept, reassured, literally, in spirit.

In the morning, refreshed, they took the private shuttle
east to the curtain. This was not in the region Stile had
crossed it before, in the chasm. The curtain meandered all
over the planet, as he and the Lady Blue had verified on
their horrendous honeymoon. This was where it traveled
almost due north-south, passing a few miles east of the
palace of the Oracle; Stile and the Lady had ridden rapidly
north along this stretch on their way to their rendezvous
with the snow-demons. That had been the key word
"flame" in his poem. Now the key word was "civil"—for
he was about to launch a civil war, as Adept fought uni-
corn and Citizen fought serf. Still to come were the key
words "flute" and "earth." He could readily see how the
first related, but the last remained obscure.

"Those key terms!" Stile exclaimed. "I was given a
dozen words to fashion into a poem in the finals of the
Tourney. Where did those words originate?"

"With the Oracle, of course. You had to be provided
some hint of your destiny."

"That's what I suspected." The Oracle had been med-
dling in his life throughout, guiding or herding him in the
prescribed direction.

Yet could he condemn it? The future of the two frames
was certainly an overwhelming consideration, and the
Oracle's present avenues of expression were extremely lim-
ited. There had been rewards along the way. Stile had been
given Citizenship in Proton and a worthy ally in the lady
robot Sheen. He had been given the Lady Blue in Phaze
and such close friends as Neysa the unicorn and Kurrel-




234 juxtaposition juxtaposition 235

gyre the werewolf. He had seen his life transformed from
the routine of serfdom to the wildest adventure—and de-
spite its hazards, he found he liked adventure. He also
liked magic. When this was all over, and he had helped
save or destroy Phaze—depending on viewpoint—he
wanted to retire in Phaze.

But there was one other prophecy. "Is it true that Phaze
will not be secure until the Blue Adept departs the frame
forever?"

Clef was sober. "I fear it is true. Stile. Possession of the
book of magic alone will make you dangerous. You will
have great power in the new order anyway, and the book
will make it so much greater that corruption is a distinct
possibility. That book in any hands in Phaze is a long-term
liability, after the crisis has been navigated. The Oracle
takes no pleasure in such news—of course it is a machine
without feelings anyway—but must report what it sees."

Stile loved the Lady Blue—but he also loved Phaze. She
loved Phaze too; he did not want to take her from it. In
the other frame there was Sheen, who loved him and
whom he was slated to marry there. He did not quite love
her, yet it seemed his course had been charted.

He closed his eyes, suffering in anticipation of his enor-
mous loss. His alternate self had yielded his life for the
good of Phaze; now it seemed Stile would have to yield his
happiness for the same objective. He would have to leave
Phaze, once the crisis had passed, and take the book with
him back to Proton.

Clef looked at him, understanding his agony. "Scant
comfort, I know—but I believe the Oracle selected you for
this mission because you alone possessed the position,
skills, and integrity to accomplish it. No other person
would make the sacrifice you will—that your alternate
already has made—guided solely by honor. Your fitness
for the office has been proved."

"Scant comfort," Stile agreed bitterly.

"There is one additional prophecy I must relay to you
immediately, before we part," Clef said. "You must mar-
shal your troops."

"Troops? How can they juxtapose the frames?"

Clef smiled. "The Oracle prophesies the need for or-
ganized force, if Phaze is to be saved."

"And I am to organize this force? For what specific
purpose?"

"That has not yet been announced."

"Well, who exactly is the enemy?"

"The Adepts and Citizens and their cohorts."

"Common folk can't fight Adepts and Citizens."

"Not folk. Creatures."

"Ah. The unicorns, werewolves, vampires—"

"Animalheads, elves, giants—"

"Dragons?"

"They are destined to join the enemy, along with the
goblins."

"I begin to fathom the nature of the battle. Half the
animalheads will die."

"And many others. But the alternative—"

"Is total destruction." Stile sighed. "I do not see myself
as a captain of battle."

"That is nevertheless your destiny. I am foreordained to
juxtapose the frames, you to equalize them. Without you,
my task is useless."

"These canny riddles by the Oracle are losing their ap-
peal. If this is not simply a matter of picking up a book of
magic and moving some Phazite the Little Folk will give
me, I would appreciate some rather more detailed infor-
mation on how I am to use these troops to accomplish my
assignment. I don't believe in violence for the sake of
violence."

Clef spread his hands. "Nor do I. But the prophecy tells
only what, not how. Perhaps the Elven Folk will have more
useful news for you."

"Perhaps. But won't the enemy Adepts be watching for
me to go to the Elven Demesnes?"

"Surely so."

"So I should avoid whatever traps they have laid for me
there, for my sake and the elves' sake. I can't visit the
Little Folk at this time, and I suspect I shouW also stay
clear of the unicorns and werewolves. So it will be very
difficult for me to organize an army among creatures who




236 juxtaposition

know me only slightly. Especially when I can't give them
any concrete instructions."

"I do not envy you your position. I am secure; the
Oracle is virtually immune from direct molestation. But
you must perform under Ere, with inadequate resources.
Presumably your Game expertise qualifies you. As I said,
the Oracle went to some trouble to secure the right man
for this exceedingly awkward position."

"Indeed," Stile agreed, unpleased.

Now they reached the curtain. Stile doubted the Adepts
would be lurking for him here; how could they know his
devious route? But they would soon spot it when he
started magic. He would have to move fast, before they
oriented and countered.

Stile plotted his course and spells as they got out of the
capsule and walked up a ramp to the surface. There was
an air lock there. "The curtain is a few meters distant; best
to hold our breath a few seconds," Clef said.

"You have certainly mastered the intricacies in a short
time."

"The Little Folk are excellent instructors. They don't
like folk my size, but they do their job well. I will be sony
to depart Phaze."

Not nearly as sorry as Stile would be! "I will make my
spells rapidly, the moment we cross," Stile said. "The
Flute prevents magic from being blocked, so the enemy
can not interfere, but it may resist a spell by a person not
holding it."

"Have no concern. I could block your magic by a single
note, but don't have to. I trust you to get me to the Oracle
in good order."

Stile paused in the air lock. "We may not meet again,
but we shall be working together." He proffered his hand.

"Surely we shall meet," Clef said warmly, taking the
hand, forgetting his own prior doubt on this score.

Then they opened the air lock, held their breath, and
charged out to intersect the faintly scintillating curtain
ahead. The air-lock door swung closed automatically be-
hind them. It was camouflaged to resemble an outcropping
of rock; Stile had passed it during his honeymoon without
ever noticing.




Juxtaposition                     237

They stepped through together. The bleak, barren desert
became lush wilderness. Stile played a few bars on the
harmonica, summoning his magic. Now he was conscious
of the spirit of his other self within the instrument, facili-
tating his performance. No doubt he had been able to
practice magic much more readily and effectively because
of this help than would otherwise have been possible.
"Adepts be deaf; computer get Clef," Stile sang. He was
trying to conceal his magic from the awareness of the
enemy; he wasn't sure that aspect would work.

Clef vanished. Stile played some more, restoring the
expended potency of the magic. This time he was con-
scious of its source, Phazite, with an ambience of magic
like a magnetic field; the music intensified and focused this
on Stile, as a magnifying glass might do with a beam of
sunshine. The transfer of Phazite to Proton-frame would
diminish this ambience, robbing his spells of half their
potency. Still, Phaze would be a magic realm—and of
course he would probably leave it, so as to make it safe.
"Conduct me whole," he sang, "to the East Pole."

He splashed in water. Naturally that was why this re-
gion was not a tourist attraction. The water was foul too;

the universal Proton pollution was slopping through. All
the more reason for tourists to stay clear!

Stile trod water and played his music again. "Set it up
solo: a floating holo."

A buoyed holographic transceiver appeared. Stile had
really strained to get the concept detail on this one. This
was to be his contact station, so that he could stay in
touch with the two frames from either side. Because it was
at the deserted, unpleasant East Pole, it should be secure
for some time from the depredations of other Adepts or
Citizens. He was sure that by this time the enemy Adepts
had booby-trapped his fixture at the West Pole and would
not expect this alternate ploy. Satisfied, Stile played more
music. "Take me down to see Brown."

He arrived at the wooden castle of the Brown Adept,
feeling nauseous. Self-transport never was comfortable,
and he had done it twice rapidly.

In a moment the pretty, brown-haired, brown-eyed child

238 (uxtaposition

dashed up to him. "Oh, Blue," she cried. "I was so afraid
they had hurt theel"

Stile smiled wanly. "I had the same fear for thee. Thou
alone didst side with me, of all the Adepts."

She scowled cutely. "Well, they did tie me up with a
magic rope or something. I was going to get a golem to
loose me, but then Yellow came and let me go. She's real
pretty in her potion-costumel She said all the others were
after thee, and she really didn't like it but couldn't go
against her own kind. Is that what I'm doing?"

"Thou art helping save Phaze from disaster," he assured
her.

"Oh, goodyl" she exclaimed, clapping her hands.

Stile had a second thought about using Brown as an
ally. Could a child have proper responsibility? Yet he
didn't seem to have much choice. She had at least had the
courage to oppose the other Adepts, which was more than
Yellow had had. "I need thy help in an important capac-
ity," he said. "There may be hard work and even danger."

"If Phaze is in trouble, I'm already in danger," she said
brightly.

"Aye. The other Adepts prefer to risk disaster later, for
the sake of power now. I must do something that will
make magic less effective, but will save Phaze for future
centuries. Then must I leave Phaze."

"Leave Phazel" she exclaimed, horrified. "I was only
just getting to know theel"

"I do not wish to leave, but a prophecy of the Oracle
suggests Phaze will not be safe until I do. I love Phaze too
much to hurt it by remaining."

A soulful tear rolled down her cheek. "Oh, Blue—I like
this noti"

"I fear the Lady Blue will like it even less," Stile said,
choking somewhat himself. "Neither will my friend Neysa
the unicorn. But what must be, must be. Now must I cross
the curtain before the other Adepts spot me. They tried to
trap me in the goblins' demesnes, and now that I escaped,
they will be attacking me anywhere they find me. In any
event, there is something I must fetch in Proton-frame. So
must I ask thee to be my coordinator in Phaze."

Her young brow furrowed. "What is this?"




Juxtaposition                     239

"The creatures of Phaze must be warned. They must be
told that the Oracle predicts disaster if certain things be
not done, and that the Blue Adept is trying to do these
things and may need their help. That the other Adepts are
trying to prevent this program from being implemented
and may attack any creatures who help me. Canst thou go
to the creatures and tell them?"

"Oh, sure, I can send my golems," she said. "If they are
not stopped by magic, they will speak the message."

"Excellent. I have set up a spell to keep thee in touch,
so that thou canst check with me across the curtain. When
I have what I need, I will return."

"I hope thy business there takes not long. This frightens
me. Blue."

"It frightens me too! But I think we can get through."
Stile played his harmonica, then sang: "Create a crystal
ball, for Brown Adept to call."

The ball appeared. Stile presented it to her. "Speak to
this when thou must reach me. I will answer if I can."

She smiled, her spirit rebounding quickly at the prospect
of this new toy. "That should be funi"

"Now must I go," Stile said. He sang a routine spell to
take him to a little-used section of the curtain, then
stepped across into a maintenance hall in Proton.

Soon he was in touch with Sheen and riding with her in
a private Citizen capsule. "What is the present state of my
fortune?" he inquired.

"Mellon has manipulated it into about sixty kilograms."

"Sixty kilos of Protonite? Already he's doubled it?"

"He's one of my friends," she reminded him. That
meant Mellon had access to information not generally
available to others, including Citizens—such as what sup-
posedly random numbers might be generated by the Game
Computer. That would of course be an enormous advan-
tage. Stile did not like all of the implications, but decided
not to inquire about the details.

"However," she said, "several things are disturbing the
Citizens and making mischief for you. It may be difficult
in the next few hours."

"It may indeed," he agreed. "The countdown for the
juxtaposition of frames has commenced. I've already set

240                    juxtaposition

most of the other Adepts against me, and soon the same
will happen with most of the Citizens."

"Yes. First there is the matter of your rapid increase
in fortune. They are concerned where it will stop, under-
standably. Second, they don't like your designating me as
your heir. The panel approved it, but now many more
Citizens are becoming aware of it. A robot with such a
fortune would be awkward. Third, there is a rumor you
mean to destroy the society of Proton. That notion is not
at all popular."

"I should think not," Stile agreed. "As it happens, they
are not far wrong."

"Will you update me, briefly? I fear things will compli-
cate rapidly, now that you have reappeared, and I lack the
living capacity to adapt to totally changed situations. Some
Citizens even expressed hope you were dead, and in that
hope their action was held in abeyance."

"So now they may seek to render me dead," Stile said.
"I thought Citizenship would alleviate my problems some-
what, but they have only intensified. Very well—you get
me to the Game Computer, and I'll fill you in."

"What do you want with the Game Computer?"

"It has the book of magic that will make me instantly
more powerful than any person in Phaze has been before.
I'll need it to protect myself from the massed power of all
the other Adepts and to facilitate the transfer of Phazite
across the curtain. Here it will be Protonite, with scientific
energy instead of magical energy. Then the frames will
separate forever, and the curtain will be gone."

She was quick to catch on. "Which world will you be in,
then. Stile?"

Stile sighed. "You know I want to be in Phaze, with the
Lady Blue. But I am of Proton, and there is a prophecy
that tells me to get clear of Phaze. So I will be here."

He thought she would be pleased, but she was not. "The
Lady Blue is to be widowed again?" she asked sharply.

"I could bring her here to Proton. But she is of Phaze; I
fear it would destroy her to leave it forever. I don't think
she would come here anyway, because here I am to marry
you."

"So it is my fault you have to widow her?"

Juxtaposition                     241

How had he gotten into this? "It is the fault of fate. I
simply am not destined to be happy after my job is done."
Then he bit his tongue. What an insult he had given
Sheen!

"I will put in for reprogramming, so she can come here.
You do not need to marry me."

Stile refused to take the bait. It was surely poisoned.
Sheen might be less complicated than a living woman, but
she did have depths. "I will marry you. It is the way it has
to be."

"Have you informed the Lady Blue of this?" she in-
quired coldly.

"Not yet." There was a dreadful taski

They were silent for a while. Stile felt the weight of the
harmonica in his pocket and brought it out for contempla-
tion. "I wish you could come out," he said to it.

Sheen looked at him questioningly.

"My other self's soul is in this instrument," Stile ex-
plained. "Clef's Flute evoked it. Apparently the original
Blue Adept conjured his spirit into his favorite possession.
It helped me play the harmonica beyond my natural abil-
ity, and maybe won a round of the Tourney for me. So he
helped me—but I can't help him. He's dead."

"This soul—you saw it in Phaze?"

"No. In Proton."

"But there's no magic in Proton."

Stile nodded thoughtfully. "I'm getting so used to magic,
I'm forgetting where I am. That Platinum Flute can't
evoke spirits in Proton—yet I swear it did. We thought
maybe some magic leaked through, but that couldn't really
happen."

"Unless this imbalance you talk of is getting worse. The
fabric is starting to tear."

"That could be. The Flute did reach across to shake the
mountains of Proton and perhaps also to give me the
dream-vision of Clef's journey to the Little Folk. Juxta-
position of one kind or another is occurring; the bound-
aries are fogging. Which is why action is required now. I
wish there were some way to restore my other self to life.
Then he could go back to Phaze, his job done."

"Why not? All he needs is a body."




242                     Juxtaposition

"Like that of a robot or android? They can't function in
Phaze."

"Perhaps a magic body, then. One that resembles you.
With his soul in it—"

"Ridiculous. You assume that such things can be as-
sembled like the parts of a robot." But Stile wondered.
What was a person, other than a body with a soul?

"If I had a soul, I'd be real," Sheen said wistfully.

Stile had given up arguing that case. "The Brown Adept
animates golems, but they're made of wood. Robots are
made of metal and plastic. Androids are living flesh, but
imperfect; they are stupid and often clumsy. If it were
possible to fashion a golem made of flesh, with a mind like
yours and a human spirit—wouldn't that be a person?"

"Of course it would," she said.

Stile decided. "Have your friends look into the matter.
It's a far shot, but if there were any way to restore my
other self to some semblance of life, I owe him that. If he
died to save Phaze, it is right that he be restored to it."

"If you have any female souls floating around looking
for a host, send one to me."

Stile took her hand. Her fingers were as soft and warm
as those of any living person. "I regard the soul as the
essence of self. If you hosted someone else's soul, you
would become that person. I prefer you as you are."

"But you can't love me as I am."

"I can't love anyone other than the Lady Blue. When
this business is done, I will accord to you whatever emo-
tion I am capable of feeling for any woman, flesh or
metal. You deserve better than this, I know."

"Half love is better than none," she said. "And if you
restore your other self in Phaze, will he love the Lady
Blue?"

"He's her husband!" Stile exclaimed. "Of course he
loves heri"

"Then why did he give her up to you?"

"To save Phaze. It was an act of supreme sacrifice."

"I am a machine. I don't appreciate the delicate nuances
of human conscience and passion as a human being can.
To me it seems more likely that he found himself in an

Juxtaposition                     243

untenable situation, as do you with me, and simply opted
out."

"That's an appalling notioni" But it also carried an in-
sidious conviction. Suppose the Blue Adept, aware of the
approaching crisis, knowing he had to make way for an-
other, and perhaps no longer in love with his wife—

"I wish I could meet your other self," Sheen said.

"You are a creature of science, he of magic," Stile said.
"Such meetings are difficult, even when both parties are
alive. You are stuck with me."

She smiled, letting it go. "And we do have more serious
business than such idle conjecturing." She put the holo on
receive, and a call was waiting.

It was from Citizen Merle. "Ah, so you're back, Stilel
Let me show you me in serf-guise. Private line, please."

"Merle, I'm with Sheen—"

"She knows that," Sheen said, setting up the noninter-
cept coding.

Merle stripped away her clothing with elegant motions.
She had an excellent body. "Stile, beware," she murmured.
"There are plots afoot to slay you."

Stile was startled by the contrast between her actions
and her words. "I thought you had seduction in mind,
Merle."

"I do, I do! I can't seduce you if you're dead, however."

There was that. "Merle, I don't want to deceive you. I'm
not interested in—"

"I understand you have business with the Game Com-
puter."

How much did she know? "Do you intend to blackmail
me?"

"By no means. You happen to be unblackmailable. But
I might help you, if you caused me to be amenable."

"If I were amenable to your design. Merle, my fiancee
here might get difficult."

"I suspect she would rather have you alive, well, and
victorious. You see, some Citizens have the notion that
you represent a threat to their welfare, so they have insti-
tuted a push to have your Citizenship revoked."

"Revoked! Is that possible?" Stile felt his underpinnings
loosening. He had assumed his Citizenship was irrevocable.

244 Juxtaposition juxtaposition 245

"Anything is possible, by a majority vote of the kilos
attending the evening business meeting. You will be on
tonight's agenda. You will need whatever help you can
get."

Stile glanced at Sheen. "This is news to you?"

"I knew something was developing, sir, but not that it
had progressed to this extent."

"Citizens have avenues of communication not available
to machines," Merle said. "I assure you the threat is gen-
uine, and the vote may well go against you. Citizens, un-
fortunately, have very narrow definitions of Self-interest."
She smiled, turning her now-naked body suggestively. She
had an excellent talent for display. "I will encourage my
associates to support you, if you come to me. This could
shift the balance. It is little enough I ask. Are you quite
sure you can't be tempted?"

Sheen, meanwhile, had been busy on another private
line. Now she glanced up. "It is true, sir," she said. "My
friends verify that in the past hour a general disquiet has
formed into a pattern of opposition. The moment news
flashed that you had reappeared in Proton, momentum
gathered. The projected vote is marginally against you.
Merle's support could save you."

"Listen to her. Stile," Merle said. "The scales are finely
balanced at the moment, but the .full thrust of your oppo-
sition has not yet manifested. Sheen has more riding on
this than her own possible Citizenship. If your Citizenship
is revoked, your tenure will end and you will have to leave
Proton. The prospect for her friends would decline drasti-
cally, perhaps fatally, incongruous as the term may be in
that application."

"How much do you know. Merle?" Stile asked tightly.

"Stile, I research what intrigues me. I have learned
much about you in the past few hours. This enhances my
respect for you. It is a thing of mine to take a piece of
those I respect. This is a harmless foible, and I always give
fair return. Come to me and I will help you."

She had him in a difficult spot. If she knew about the
self-willed machines and possibly about Stile's mission to
restore parallelism in the separating frames, she could cer-
tainly cause him much mischief.

"Sir, I think you should go to her," Sheen said.

Stile found himself athwart a dilemma. He had told
Mellon to arrange a private bet, to the limit of his avail-
able finances, that he would not be seduced by Merle. He
did not care to lose that bet, for such a loss would wipe
him out. But if her support was all that guaranteed his
continuing Citizenship, he could lose everything despite
winning the bet. He was between Scylla and Charybdis,
the devil and the deep sea, the rock and the hard place.

"I am frankly surprised you do not heed your metal
fiancee," Merle said. "She does seem to know what's best
for you."

Stile's flash of rage was stifled by Sheen's imploring
look. He decided to meet with Merle and try to explain.
Maybe he could win through. "Give me your address."

She gave the code, and Sheen changed course. The book
of magic would have to wait a little.

There was another call. This one was for Sheen, from
Mellon. "We have a delivery for you," he said. "Cosmetics
for our employer."

"I don't need—" Stile started to protest. But he was cut
off by a glance from the serf.

"Thank you," Sheen said. "I'll pick them up at the near-
est delivery tube when we leave the capsule." She gave him
Merle's code, and the connection broke.

"Do I look that haggard?" Stile asked plaintively. "I had
a good night's rest."

"Mellon is not concerned about your appearance. Obvi-
ously something is afoot. Maybe the Lady Citizen has
placed an order for an intoxicating or sexually compelling
drug, and this is the counteragent."

"Maybe," Stile agreed morosely. "Sheen, Merle is pretty
enough in her rejuvenated state, and I'm sure she has a
good mind and lots of experience. But I'm simply not
interested in the sort of liaison she desires. How do I get
out of this one without imperiling my Citizenship?"

"What you are interested in is not very important," she
said. "Merle does not want any romance; she merely wants
an act of sex to add to her collection. The practical thing
is for you to give it to her."

"And lose my bet," Stile said.




246 Juxtaposition juxtaposition 247

Sheen looked startled. "Oh, my—I'm starting to think
like a person! I forgot all about that! Of course you can't
oblige her." She seemed relieved.
• "If I oblige anyone in that way, it will be you."

"Anytime."

"After we're decently married."

"It's not a decent marriage."

The capsule arrived, sparing him further comment.
They got out at a small private terminal. From liere there
was access to three small domes, one of which was Merle's.

Sheen went to the delivery chute and punched the cod-
ing for Mellon's package. A small vial fell into her hand.
Her brow furrowed as she brought the item back. "This is
no cosmetic, sir. It's—" She broke off. "Let's move quickly,
sir."

Suddenly gas hissed into the room from barred vents.
Sheen launched herself at the entrance to Merle's dome.
It was locked closed.

"I don't have the facility to analyze this gas," she cried.
"But I'll bet it's not cleaning fog. Breathe this, sir." She
opened the vial, holding it under his nose.

Vapor puffed out. Stile took the vial, sniffing it as the
Erst waft of the other gas reached him. The vial's vapor
was sweet and pleasant; the other gas was sour and sting-
ing.

Sheen returned to the locked door. She opened her front
cabinet, the left breast swinging out on hinges to reveal an
array of small tools. Even in this crisis. Stile marveled at
the completely womanish texture of that breast, when in
fact it was a mere facade. Robotry was quite sophisticated.

In a moment Sheen had burned through the lock with a
tiny laser unit and had the passage open. Stile hurried
through. Sheen shut the door behind them, blocking off
the gas, and closed up her breast cabinet. She was whole
and normal and soft again.

Stile felt woozy and sick. The antidote in the vial had
helped, but that poison gas was nasty stuff. Someone had
tried to exterminate himi

Merle appeared. She was wearing a translucent negligee
that did wonders for a body that hardly needed them. Stile

noticed but hardly cared. He suffered himself to be led
inside the Citizen's dome.

"I knew they were going to try something," Merle said.
"I thought it would be at the Game Annex. I tried to get
you here to safety, but they were too quick. I couldn't say
anything on the holo; even a private line is only as private
as the technology behind it."

"Our staff forwarded the antidote, sir," Sheen told her.

Stile sat in the comfortable chair where they had placed
him, lacking initiative to do more than listen.

"My staff has found a better neutralizer," Merle said.
She brought a breathing mask. "Use this. Stile." She fitted
it over his face.

Immediately his head began to clear and his stricken
body recovered.

"The official indication is a malfunction in the cleaning
apparatus," Merle continued. "It's not supposed to fog
when anyone is there, and this time the wrong chemicals
were used. We won't be able to trace it, but I know the
cause. There are activist Citizens who want you out of the
way. Stile; I fear this is but the first attempt. You should
be safe here, however."

Stile removed the breathing mask and smiled weakly. "I
thought you had another notion. Merle."

"Oh, I do, I do. We have been through this before. But I
do like you personally. Stile, and wish you well. You're the
most refreshing thing to appear on the scene in some time.
Fortunately the two notions are not incompatible."

"I fear they are. Merle. You have helped me get into a
difficult situation." Stile's head had cleared, but his body
remained weak; it was easier to talk than to act. He be-
lieved he could trust this woman.

"Do tell me!" she urged. "I love challenges."

"Are we private here?"

"Of course. I am neither as young nor as naive as I try
to appear."

"Will you keep my confidence?"

"About the liaison? Of course not! That must be known,
or it doesn't count."

"About whatever I may tell you of my situation."




248 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 249

"I can't guarantee that. Stile. I blow something abort
your situation already."

"Maybe you should tell me what you know, then."

"You are known as the Blue Adept in the other frame.
Oh, yes, I have been to Phaze; my other self lacked re-
juvenation and modem medicine and died a few years
back of natural complications, freeing me. But magic is
not for me; I remained there only a few hours and re-
treated to the safety of my dome here. The germs there are
something fiercel I do, however, have a fold of the curtain
passing through my property. I pay a harpy well to update
me periodically on Phaze developments. This is how I
learned more of you, once my interest in you was roused.
You have been honeymooning with your lovely Phaze
wife, but Adepts have been laying snares for you, until
recently you disappeared into the demesnes of the goblins.
My informant thought you dead, though she reports a
dragon and a hawk emerged safely and flew rapidly south-
east, eluding pursuit by Adept sendings. Evidently you
survived by crossing the curtain. You seem to be a figure
of some importance in Phaze—and perhaps in Proton too,
judging by this assassination attempt."

"What could you pay a harpy to serve you?" Stile asked,
intrigued by this detail.

"She loves blood-soaked raw meat, but is too old and
frail to catch it herself."

"The others of her flock would provide," Stile said,
thinking of the harpy attack Clef had weathered upon his
entry into Phaze. How important that entry had turned
out to be!

"This one is a loner. No flock helps her."

"Is she by chance your other self?"

Merle stiffened, then relaxed. "Oh, you have a sharp
tongue. Stile! No, it doesn't work that way, or I couldn't
cross. My other self was exactly like me, only she seemed
older. She did befriend the harpy, and when she died I
assumed the burden of that friendship. It is not easy to get
along with a harpyi Now will you tell me what I do not
know about yourself?"

"Will you accept that information in lieu of the sexual
liaison?"

"Na, of course not. Stile. I accept it in exchange for the
protection I am offering you here, and for the information
I am giving you about the Citizen plot against you."

She would not be swayed from her objective! She
wanted another notch for her garter. He would have to
give her the full story and hope it would persuade her to
help him without insisting on the liaison. She might be
displeased to learn about his bet in that connection, but at
least it was no affront to her pride.

There was a chime and glimmer of light in the air.
"That's my holo," Merle said. "Call for you. Stile, blocked
by my privacy intercept."

"Better let it through," he said. "The enemy Citizens
know I'm here anyway."

The picture formed. It was the Brown Adept. "The crea-
tures don't believe me. Blue," she said tearfully. "They
think I'm with the bad Adepts, trying to fool them. They
are attacking my golems."

Stile sighed. He should have known. "What would it
take to convince them?"

"Only thee thyself. Blue. Or maybe one of thy close
friends, or the Lady Blue—"

"No! The Lady Blue must remain guarded by the uni-
corns. The Adepts will be watching her."

"Maybe Neysa. She's friends with everybody."

"The Herd Stallion won't let her go." Stile hardly ob-
jected to the care provided for Neysa in her gravid state.
Then he had an idea. "Thy demesnes are near to the range
of the werewolves, are they not? Kurrelgyre's Pack?"

She brightened. "Sure, Blue. They come here all the
time, hunting. But they don't believe me either."

"But if Kurrelgyre believed, his Pack would help. The
other animals would believe him."

"I guess so," she agreed dubiously. "But thou wouldst
have to tell him thyself."

"I will," Stile said. "Give me half an hour."

Brown's smile was like moonlight. "Oh, thank thee,
Blue!"

"Nay, thank thee. Brown. It is an important service
thou dost here."

"Gee." The happy image faded.




250 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 251

"So that's the Brown Adept," Sheen said. "A child. A
cute child."

"She's a full sorceress, though," Stile said. "Her golems
are tough creatures." He remembered his encounter with
the golem shaped in his own image. He was glad to have
those wooden men on his side, this timel He turned to
Merle. "Now I have to explain to you my reason for not
wishing to have this liaison, then hurry across your section
of the curtain to straighten things out in Phaze."

"No need to explain," Merle said. "I can see you are
busy, with people depending on you. I'll chalk this one up
to experience."

"I do need your help," Stile said. "So I want you to
understand—"

"You shall have my help. Stile. If that sweet child be-
lieves in you, so must I. I'm sure she is not asking any
quid pro quo."

"Well, she may want a ride on a unicorn," Stile said,
wondering whether he could believe this abrupt change of
heart on her part. "But you still deserve to know—"

"About your secret bet," Merle said. "That's what made
it such a challenge. Stile. But if you lose your fortune and
can't do what you need to, that brown-eyed child will
suffer, and I don't want that on my withered conscience.
I'll show you to my comer of the curtain; that will get you
neatly past the ambush awaiting you outside."

Stile stood, taking her hand. "I really appreciate this,
Merle."

She drew him in for a kiss. "I think it was that child's
thee's and thy's. You did it too, when you answered her.
Somehow that melts me. I haven't been this foolish in
decades."

They were before the curtain. It scintillated across
Merle's huge round bouncy bed. No coincidence, that; she
probably had a demon lover in the other frame. Beyond,
Stile could discern the slope of a wooded hillside.

"How will I rejoin you?" Sheen asked.

"You'll come with me," Stue decided. "By now the
enemy Citizens know how useful you are; they'll be trying
to take you out too." He picked her up, strode across the
bed, and willed himself through the curtain.

He stood on the forest slope, the inert robot in his arms.
In Phaze, she was defunct. "Take this form of Sheen's to
the wolves' demesnes," he sang. This was simplified; what
he intended was for them both to travel there.

They arrived in good order. The wolves were snoozing
in the vicinity of a recent kill, while several of the cubs
growled at a golem they had treed. Half a dozen roused
and charged Stile, converting to men and women as they
drew near.

"Greetings, Blue Adept," Kurrelgyre exclaimed, recog-
nizing him. "I see thou hast found a defective golem."

Stile glanced down at Sheen, startled. "I suppose I have,
friend. In the other frame she is my fiancee."

"Ah, a bitch in every frame! Dost thou bring her here
for animation by the Brown Adept?"

Again Stile was startled. Would such magic work? He
would have to inquire. "I came to advise thee that I am
at odds with the other Adepts, who seek to slay me. Thus I
can not stay here long, lest they discover me and strike.
Only the Brown Adept is with me, and I have asked her to
spread warning to the tribes of the creatures of Phaze,
whose help I may be needing soon."

"Oooowwl" Kurrelgyre howled, glancing at the tree. "I
turned her down—"

"I know," Stile cut in. "I should have prepared better.
Things have been very rushed. Now must I beg thee to
help me by helping her. If thy wolves will go with her
golems, to give them credence—"

"Aye, immediately," Kurrelgyre agreed. He made a sig-
nal at the tree, and the cubs quickly retreated, allowing the
golem to come down. "Had I but realized before—"

Stile clapped him on the shoulder. "I thank thee. Now
must I flee."

There was a wrenching. Oops—he had made an inad-
vertent rhyme, with Sheen leaning against him. Quickly he
took better hold of her and willed "himself to the Brown
Demesnes. It worked; he landed neatly in the foyer of the
wooden castle. The giant golem on guard did a double
take, but managed to recognize him before clubbing him,
and in a moment the Brown Adept was there.




252 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 253

"That's not one of minel" she exclaimed, seeing the
inert Sheen in his arms.

"This is Sheen, my Proton fiancee. She was with me
when thou didst call a little while ago. She'll be all right
when we cross the curtain. I just talked to Kurrelgyre, and
the wolves will cooperate. Instruct thy golems; a wolf will
go with each."

"Oh, goody!" But her attention was focused on Sheen.
"I don't usually animate metal, but I can when I try. Of
course her personality might not be the same—"

Stile had not intended to get into this now, but again
he was intrigued. "Sheen always wanted to come to Phaze,
but she's scientific. Thy golems are magic, and won't op-
erate in Proton. I don't think it could work."

"Let me try. Blue. If I animate her, thou wilt not have
to carry her."

"I'm in a hurry. Brown. The hostile Adepts could spot
me at any moment. There isn't time—"

"Why dost thou not want to animate her here?" she
asked with the direct naivete of a child.

That stopped Stile. The Lady Blue, his wife, was in
Phaze, yet she could cross to Proton, where she had met
Sheen. There really was no conflict. "How fast canst thou
do it?"

"She is full-formed." Brown squinted at Sheen's torso
critically. "Very full-formed. I have only to lay on my
hands and concentrate. Most of the time I spend fashion-
ing a golem is carving it to shape before animation."

"Try it, then. But if she is not herself—I mean, the
golems can be—"

"Then will I deanimate her." Brown leaned over Sheen,
where Stile placed her on the ground, and ran her hands
over the body. Then she pressed her fingers across the    !
face.

Sheen stirred. Her eyes opened.

Stile stood back, abruptly nervous. Golems were non-
living things, soulless ones animated only by magic,    i
Brown's ability to make them function was phenomenal—    !
but what monster in Sheen's image might rouse here?

Sheen sat up, shaking her head. She saw Stile. "Oh,

we're back," she said. "I must have been set back by the
deactivation. I feel funny."

She was herselfl "Thou dost know me?" Stile asked,
hardly daring to believe. A new golem would not have
knowledge of him.

"Of course I know you, Stilel I'm not that forgetful,
unless my memory banks get erased. And this child is the
one who called you on holo. She—" Sheen broke oS,
surprised. "What is she doing here?"

"This is Phaze," Stile said. "The Brown Demesnes."

Sheen blinked. "I don't believe that is possible. I can't
function across the curtain; you know that."

"I animated thee," the child said. "Thou art now a
golem."

Sheen looked around, taking in the scene. She saw the
wooden walls of the castle, and the golems standing near.
"May I inspect this region?"

Stile was becoming nervous about the time. "Do it
quickly. Sheen. Thou wilt be inert again if the enemy
Adepts discover our presence here and attack." He was
almost fidgeting.

"I think they are distracted by other events," Brown
said. "They know not what my golems are doing."

Sheen completed her survey extremely quickly. "There
is no dome. The air is natural. This is the other world.
Will I remain animate? I feel no different."

"Yes," the Brown Adept said. "My golems never die,
unless they are destroyed." Tactfully, she did not mention
her ability to turn them off.

"Yet I am not alive," Sheen concluded sadly.

"That is beyond the power of magic," Brown agreed.

"And of science," Stile added. "Now must we go." He
took Sheen's hand and sang a spell to take them to a
private section of the curtain. One thing he had done
during his honeymoon was survey likely crossing places.

They landed in a secluded glade in the Purple Mountain
foothills. "Now that's an experiencel" Sheen exclaimed. "It
really is a magic land."

"It really is," Stile agreed. "Art thou able to cross the
curtain by thyself now?"




254

Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

255

Sheen tried, but could not. "I am not alive," she re-
peated. "I have no power to do what living creatures do."

Stile took her hand again and willed them across. They
stood in a vehicle storage garage. "Do you remember?" he
asked.

"I remember Phaze," she said. "I have not changed.
Only your language has changed."

"So there is no loss of continuity as you shift from
magic to science."

"None at all. I am the same. I wish I were not."

"Now let's get that book of magic before we are di-
verted again. We're close to a Game Annex terminal, by
no coincidence. I can contact the Game Computer pri-
vately there."

"Let me do it," Sheen said. "There may be another
ambush."

"You're my fiancee. I shouldn't let you take all the
risks."

"Without you, I am nothing. Without me, you are a
leading Citizen and Adept, capable of saving Phaze and
helping my friends. Stand back, sir."

Stile smiled and shrugged. "Give me the book of magic,"
she said to the Game-access terminal, adding the code.

"Why?" the Computer asked.

"The Blue Adept means to return it to Phaze and there
use it to abate the crisis."

"One moment," the machine said. "While it is on the
way, will you accept a message for the Blue Adept?"

"Yes."

"A. consortium of opposition Citizens, interested in
profiting from a necessary action, proffers this wager: the
entire amount of Citizen Stile's fortune at the time, that he
will not survive until the start of tonight's business meeting
of Citizens."

"Ill take that betl" Stile called, realizing that he could
not lose it. If he died prematurely, all was lost anyway; if
he lived, his fortune and power would be doubled again.
Double or nothing, right when he wanted it.

"Citizen Stile accepts the wager," Sheen said. "If he
dies, his estate will be liquidated and assigned to the con-
sortium. If he appears at that meeting alive, his fortune
will in that instant be doubled, and he will immediately be
able to wield the full leverage of it."

"The wager is so entered. The doubling cube has been
turned." The Game Computer made a bleep that was its
way of coughing apologetically. "I have no part of this
threat other than serving as a conduit for the wager. It was
not necessary for the Citizen to be concerned about an
ambush on my premises. Neither am I permitted to warn
him of any potential threat immediately beyond my prem-
ises."

"That's warning enough," Stile muttered. "Move out,
Sheeni"

Sheen paused only long enough to pick up the package
the delivery slot delivered: the book of magic.

They fled down a hall. "Weapons are not permitted on
Game premises unless part of a designated Game," the
Game Computer announced.

"It is not warning us, just making a public announce-
ment—officially," Stile said with a grim smile. "Is the
Game Computer really one of your friends?"

"Yes," she said.

A man appeared in the hall ahead. He looked like an
ordinary serf, but he stood before them with a suggestive
posture of readiness.

"That's a robot," Stile said.

"That's a killer machine," Sheen agreed. "Stile, I am a
dual-purpose robot, designed for defense and personality.
That is a specialized attack vehicle. I am not equipped to
handle it. You must flee it immediately; I can delay it only
a moment."

Stile dived for a panel. He tore open a section of the
wall where he knew power lines ran. There they were,
brightly colored cables, intended to be quite clearly coded
for stupid maintenance personnel. He took a red one in
both hands and yanked. It ripped free as the enemy robot
came near. "Get well away, Sheeni" he cried.
"Stile, you'll electrocute yourselfl" she cried in horror.
Now he took hold of a white cable. This, too, tore from
its mooring, which was a magnetic clamp.




256

juxtaposition

As the killer robot reached for him, Stile jammed both
taw cable ends at its body. Power arced and crackled,
electrifying the machine. The robot collapsed.

"You took a terrible chancel" Sheen admonished him as
they hurried on. "You could have been electrocuted just

pulling those cables out."

"The power was cut off, to free the magnetic clamps,"
Stile said. "The danger was apparent, not real."

"How could you know that?" She sounded flustered.

"The Game Computer is one of your friends," he re-
minded her.

"Oh." For her friends stood ready to help him, covertly.
The Computer had cut off power, then restored it. How
could such a brief collusion ever be spotted? Stile knew
exactly how to use the assistance of the self-willed ma-
chines when he needed to: Fortunately the specialized

killer machine had been stupid.

The passage led to the minicar racing track, a favorite
Game of the younger set. Stile had won many such races.
His small size gave him an advantage in these little ve-
hicles. However, this time he only wanted to bypass the
cars and reach the exit passage.

A man burst into the premises. This one was a genuine
human serf—but he had a laser pistol. This was evidently
the one the Game Computer had warned away. Unfortu-
nately, outside the actual Games, the Computer had little
power. It could protest and warn, not usually enforce. It
could summon guards—but if it did so in this case, the
other Citizens would be alerted, and that was not to Stile's
interest. Stile would have to Eght this one out alone; the

Computer had helped all it could.

"Sheen, get out of here," he whispered urgently. "Use
the service passages and airless sections to confound
human pursuit. Get the book of magic across the curtain."

"But I must protect youl" she protested.

"You can protect me best by getting away from me
right now. I can do tricks alone that I can't with company.
Meet me later—" He paused to decide on a suitably un-
likely place. "Meet me at Merle's dome. They've booby-
trapped that once; they won't expect me to go near it
again. If you prefer, wait for me just beyond the curtain,




luxtaposition                     257

in Phaze—oh, I forget, you can't cross by yourself! Maybe
Merle will help you cross."

She did not argue further. "I love you." She faded away.

Stile jumped into the nearest car and accelerated it into
the main playing grid. Ordinarily he would have had to
obtain license from the Game Computer to play, but Citi-
zens were exempt from such rules. The pursuing man,
however, was a serf; he had to honor this rule, or the
Computer would close down the Game, apply a stasis
Eeld, and arrest him. Here the Computer had power, when
there was a valid pretext to exert it. As it was, the Com-
puter knew the man was up to mischief, and had already
warned him about carrying the pistol.

The various ramps, intersections, and passing zones
were arrayed in three-dimensional intricacy, so that the
total driving area was many kilometers Jong despite the
conEnement of the dome. Stile was well familiar with this
layout.

The armed man had been stalking him cautiously. Now
the man had to get into another car to keep up. To do this,
he had to get a partner and enlist in the Game. But he was
prepared for this; a henchman got into another car and
started the pursuit. Theoretically, they were chasing each
other; actually, they were both after Stile.

Stile smiled grimly. These would-be killers would have
more of a chase than they liked. They were up against an
expert Gamesman: a Tourney winner, in fact.

Stile could shoot his car through the maze of paths. He
could exit quickly. But that would only mean the armed
man would follow him. It was better to handle this situa-
tion here, where the terrain favored Stile, and then escape
cleanly.

A beam of light passed to Stile's right. The armed man
had Ered his laser, missing because of the difficulty of
aiming when the cars were going in different directions at
different speeds. But the shot was close enough so that
Stile knew the man had some skill; he would score if given
a better opportunity. Now the Computer could not shut
down the Game, though the laser shot had provided suffi-
cient pretext, because when the cars stopped, the assassin
would score on Stile.

258 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 2S9

Stile swung around a turn, putting a lamp between him-
self and the pursuer. He checked the minicar, but there
was nothing in it he could throw. He would have to ma-
neuver until he could End a way to put the man out of
commission.

The problem was, these vehicles were small but safe.
They would not travel fast enough to leave the track, and
the set was designed to prevent collisions. Such Games
were supposed to seem far more dangerous than they were
in fact. Stile might scare his opponent, but could not actu-
ally hurt him with the car. Still, there were ways.

Stile slowed his car, allowing the man to catch up
somewhat. Then, just as the man was leveling his laser,
Stile accelerated into a loop, going up and over and
through. The man, caught by surprise, had to accelerate
his own car and hang on. The cars could not fall, even if
they stalled upside down at the top of a loop, and the
automatic seat belts would hold the occupants fast. The
man evidently did not know that.

Stile moved on into a roller-coaster series, going up and
down at increasing velocity. The man followed, looking
uncomfortable. He was fairly solid, and his belly lightened
and settled with each change of elevation. That could start
the queasies. Then Stile looped into a tunnel with a good
lead, emerged to spin into a tight turn, and crossed over
the other track just as the pursuer shot out of the tunnel.

Stile had removed his robe. He dropped it neatly over
the man's head.

The man reacted violently, clawing at the voluminous
material that the wind plastered to his face, while the car
continued along the track. Stile slowed his own car, letting
the other catch up. Just as the man managed to get free of
the robe. Stile jumped from one car to the other, having
also circumvented the seat restraint. He caught the man's
neck in a nerve-strangle, rendering him instantly uncon-
scious, and took the laser pistol from his hand. Then he
jumped back to his own car and accelerated away. Such
jumps from car to car were supposed to be impossible, but
Stile was a skilled gymnast, able to do what few others
could contemplate.

Now he zoomed for the exit. He had left his robe be-


hind; it made identiEcation too easy for his assassination-
minded pursuers. Still, being a serf was not enough camou-
flage. There would be other assassins on the prowl for
him, closing on this region. The majority of Citizens, like
the Adepts, seemed to be against him; they had tremen-
dous resources that would be overpowering once they got
the focus. He needed to get far away from here in a
hurry.

Could he retreat to the curtain, as he had done when the
Adepts had had him pinned in the cavern? No, they would
be watching the segments of it through which he had
entered Proton this time. He had to surprise them.

Camouflage seemed to be the answer—but what kind?

Already Stile was making his decision. The most com-
mon and least noticed entities in Proton were machines,
ranging from self-propelled hall-brushers to humanoid
robots. Some were sophisticated emulations of individual-
ity like Sheen, but most were cruder. Stile paused at a food
machine and got some nutri-taffy; this he used to shape
bulges at his knees and elbows, and to change the config-
uration of his neck and crotch. He now resembled a small,
sexless menial humanoid robot that had been used in a
candy kitchen. He walked somewhat stiffly and set a fixed
smile on his face, since this grade of machine lacked facial
mobility. Stile was, of course, a practiced mimic. He was
unable to eliminate his natural body heat, but hoped no
one would check him that closely.

It worked. Serfs passed him without paying any atten-
tion. There was a checkpoint guarded by two brute
androids, but they were looking for a man, not a taffy-
odored machine. Stile walked stiffly by, unchallenged.

He was probably safe now, but he did not gamble. He
continued his robot walk to a transport capsule and rode
to the vicinity of Merle's dome, then took the service
entrance. Even here there was no challenge. Functionaries
were constantly in and out of Citizens' estates on myriad
errands.

But Merle was expecting him. "Stile, I want you to
know I sincerely regret this," she said. "Extreme pressure
has been put on me. Believe me, I'm helping you in my
fashion." She touched a button.




260

juxtaposition

juxtaposition

261

Stile leaped to intercept her motion, but was too late.
Stasis caught him.

Merle had betrayed him. Why hadn't he anticipated
that? He could so readily have gotten around her, had he
only been alert. He had allowed a woman to make a fool
of him.

He was cleaned and packaged and loaded into a trans-
port capsule. He could feel the motion without seeing
anything. The capsule moved swiftly south, by the feel of
it. At length it slowed, and he was unloaded.

The stasis released. Stile found himself in a barred
chamber—and with him was Sheen. She was inert; her
power cell had been removed. The disaster was complete.
There was no sign of the book of magic.

A speaker addressed him. "Serf, you have been assigned
to this mine because you have excellent manual dexterity.
You will be granted one hour to familiarize yourself with
the controls. Then you will be expected to commence
processing the ore in your bailiwick. You will have a rest
break in your cell of fifteen minutes after each hour,
provided your production is satisfactory. Superior perform-
ance will result in promotion. Press the ADVISE button
if there is any problem. Malingering will not be tolerated."

Stile knew better than to protest. He had been shang-
haied here to get him out of the way. Once he failed to
appear at the business meeting, he would lose his fortune,
be voted out of Citizenship, become a serf in fact, and
probably be deported. He didn't even blame Merle; she
had done this instead of killing him. Perhaps she had
reported him dead. No doubt her own Citizenship had
been placed in the balance. The opposition, in Proton as in
Phaze, played hard ball.

What could he do? A quick inspection of the chamber
satisfied him that he could not escape. The Protonite min-
ers were not trusted; each was locked in his cell during
working hours, even though he never directly handled the
valuable mineral. Security was extremely tight in the
mines. If Stile tried to interfere with any of the equipment
or wiring, there would be an alarm and immediate punish-
ment; if he tried to sabotage the mining operation, he
would be executed. All he could do was cooperate.

Stile got to work on the mining. He familiarized himself
with the controls in moments, and soon had his survey-
screen on. Could he use this to get in touch with the
Brown Adept? No—this was a different circuit—and even
if he could call outside, the monitor would intercept, and
he would be in instant trouble, possibly of a mortal nature.
Best to sit tight. Probably the game was lost. He had
mainly himself to blame; the exigencies of the moment
had forced an oversight.

Of course he was not entirely alone. The Lady Blue
knew he was in Proton, and she would be concerned about
his failure to reappear. But she had not been keeping dose
track of him; she would not be really alarmed until some
hours or days had passed without news—and that would
be too late. He would have missed the business meeting
and the juxtaposition of frames. In any event, the enemy
Citizens would now be alert for her; Stile did not want the
Lady Blue exposing herself to possible assassination.

What about the self-willed machines? They might be
able to help—if Merle had not acted to conceal his abduo-
tion from their view. Since she knew a good deal about
him and had referred to Sheen's friends, she had probably
done just that. And if the sapient machines did locate him,
they would still hesitate to reveal their nature by acting
overtly on his behalf. He could not count on their rescuing
him.

That left it up to the Brown Adept, who would be
unable to reach him—and what could she do if she did?
She was a child who would have no magic in this frame,
assuming she could cross the curtain. Best to establish no
false hopes. If help was on the way, it would succeed or
fail regardless of his concern.

He was good at mining. Under his direction, the remote-
controlled machinery operated efficiently. In two hours he
had extracted half a gram of Protonite from the ore, a full
day's quota. Whether Citizen or serf. Adept or slave, he
intended to do his best—though this sort of mining would
soon have to stop, if the frames were to be saved. Ironic,
his effort here!

Then the gate opened. An apparition stood there—the
tallest, thinnest, ugliest android he had ever seen. Except




262 Juxtaposition

that it wasn't an android, but a man. No, not exactly a
man—

Stile's spinning mental gears finally made an improbable
connection. "The trolll" he exdaimed. "Trool the troll—in
Proton-framel"

"I must rescue thee from confinement three times,"

Trool said.

Stile nodded. "This is the third, for me and mine. More
than amply hast thou fulfilled the prophecy. Sincerely do I
thank thee, Trool." There was no point in adhering to
Proton language; the troll would only be confused.

"It is not done yet," the troll said.

"Thou hast done enough," Stile said. "Thou hast freed
me"

Trool shrugged and stooped to pick Sheen up. He
shambled through the door, carrying her, and Stile fol-
lowed.

Trolls had a way with subterranean regions. Trool took
them down into the depths of the mines, passing locks and
checkpoints without challenge, until they were in the low-
est crude tunnels. Here there were only machines, the
forward end of the remote-control chain. Here, too, was
the Protonite ore, the stuff of Proton's fortune and mis-
fortune.

"How are things doing in Phaze at the moment?" Stile
inquired.

"The hosts are massing as for war," Trool replied. "All
are with thee except the Adepts, the goblins, and scattered
monsters."

"All?" Stile asked, amazed. "Even the tribes of the de-
mons?"

"Thou hast made many friends. Adept, especially
among the snow-monsters and fire-spirits."

Ah—his favor for Freezetooth was paying a dividend!
"All I have done is the appropriate thing at the appropriate
time." Basically, Stile liked the various creatures of Phaze
and liked making friends. "Yet I doubt that the harpies, or
dragons, or thine own kind—"

"The trolls are with thee." Trool made a grimacing
smile. "I did see to that, lest they call me traitor for
helping thee. The harpies and dragons know no loyalty

Juxtaposition                     263

save to their own kind, unless compelled by geis. They
take no sides."

Trool was surprisingly well informed. He seemed, under
that ugliness, to be a fairly smart and caring person. Stile
had assumed all trolls to be ignorant predators; he had
been too narrow.

Suddenly they were at the curtain; Stile saw the scintil-
lation across the tunnel. They stepped through.

Sheen woke. "Who are you?" she demanded, finding
herself in the troll's arms.

"Thou hast no power pack," Stile protested. "How canst
thou animate?"

She checked herself. "It's true. I must be in Phaze. In
golem-state."

Stile nodded, his surprise shifting to comprehension. Of
course she needed no scientific mechanism here! Nonethe-
less, he conjured her a replacement power cell so that she
would not be confined to Phaze. "Thou art a creature of
both frames now."

The troll led the way on up through the tunnel toward
the surface. They followed. Stile could have taken them
out by a spell, but preferred to acquaint himself with the
locale of the tunnel in case he should need it again. Also,
he did not want to attract the baleful attention of the
enemy Adepts by using magic unnecessarily. Probably he
should not have risked conjuring Sheen's power cell at this
time; he kept forgetting.

They neared the surface. Trool paused. "There is yet
day," he said. "Needs must I remain below." For he lacked
his voluminous clothing, having had to discard it in order
to masquerade as an android.

"By all means," Stile said. "Thou hast served us well,
and fain would I call thee friend. We shall leave thee with
our gratitude."

"It behooves not the like of thee to bestow friendship on
the like of me," Trool said, grumy pleased. He put his
gnarled hands to the large flat rock that blocked the exit.
"Beyond this point it curves to the surface." He heaved.

Suddenly the roof caved in. Trool leaped back, shoving
the other two clear. "Someone has tampered—"

Sunlight shone brilliantly down from above, angling in




264 Juxtaposition

from the new hole in the ceiling to bathe the troll. "Sab-
otagel" Sheen exclaimed. "It would have cmshed one of
us—"

"Surely," Stile agreed. "The trap was meant for me."

"Look at Trooll" she cried, horrified.

Stile looked. The troll had been instantly destroyed by
the light. He was now a figure of stone—a grotesque
statue.

Suddenly it made a terrible land of sense. Stile remem-
bered how Serrilryan the werebitch had been fated to see
the sidhe three times before she died; she had seen them
the third time, then died. Trool had been fated to help
Stile three times; he had done that, and had now been
terminated.

"Damn it, this time I'm going to fight fate," Stile said
angrily.

CHAPTER 11

Xanadu

Clef was in the palace of the Oracle, playing the Platinum
Flute. The perfect melody suffused the premises, more
lovely than any tangible thing could be. He halted when
Stile's party arrived.

"I have another prophecy for thee," he said to Stile.
"Thou wilt be betrayed for thine own good by a young-
seeming woman thou dost trust."

"Too late on that," Stile said. "Merle betrayed me three
hours ago."

Clef was embarrassed. "Sorry; I understood it was
scheduled for a few hours hence. The Oracle must have
slipped a cog." He looked at Sheen. "I thought thou wast a
creature of Proton," he said, surprised.

Juxtaposition                     265

"I am," she agreed. "Now I am a creature of Phaze too,
a golem." She indicated the statue she supported. "This is
Trool the troll, who sacrificed himself to save us. Stile says
you may—thou mayest be able to—" She paused. "But
doesn't the juxtaposition suffer when thou dost stop play-
ing?"

"Marginally. It's a long process; inertia maintains the
movement for brief interludes. Otherwise I could not take
a breath. In any event, what you hear is not the juxtaposi-
tion theme; that is only part of it, a single-note exercise
that reaches into the deeper firmament. It is not continu-
ous; rather I must play it at the key intervals." Clef con-
sidered the statue. "Thou dost wish the troll's soul piped to
Heaven?"

"Nay, not yet," Stile said. "Canst thou pipe him back to
life?"

Clef stroked his chin thoughtfully. "I fear not. Stile.
There is a monstrous difference between directing traffic—
that is, routing a soul to Heaven—and revivifying the
dead. I can send the soul back into the body—but that in
itself will not change stone or flesh. You need a different
kind of magic for that. Perhaps there is a suitable spell in
the book of magic. You did fetch that?"

"The book of magici" Stile exclaimed, stricken. "I for-
got all about it!"

"Merle has it," Sheen said. "She deactivated me—and
now the book is gone."

"Is that why she betrayed me?" Stile asked. 'To get that
book?"

"I doubt she knew of it," Sheen said. "She said nothing
about it to me. I just happened to be carrying it."

"She surely has some inkling now, though. She has ac-
cess to the curtain, to Phaze; she can use those spells to
become an instant Adept. We've got to get the book back
before she does thati"

"For the sake of Phaze as well as for the troll," Sheen
agreed.

"I'll surely find her at the Citizens' business meeting."
Stile frowned, worried. "I don't have much time for tha^
either; I've got to move." His hope of studying the spells




266 juxtaposition

of the book before the Proton crisis came had been dashed;

whatever preparations he might have made were moot.

"I'll go with thee," Sheen said.

"But Erst thou must marshal thy troops," Clef said.
"The time is nigh."

"Oh, yes, the troops. I, did alert the various creatures of
Phaze, and all but the dragons, harpies, and goblins are
with us. Has the Oracle finally condescended to inform us
exactly how such troops are to be employed?"

"Only that thou must dispose them as for battle."

"Dispose them where? Against whom?"

Clef shrugged, embarrassed. "I know not"

"That is not a phenomenal help."

"Thou knowest that prophecies work out regardless of
comprehension,"*

"Look, if I miss that Citizens' business meeting, I'm
finished in Proton. I have scarcely an hour as it is. Can't
the Phaze side wait at least until I've recovered the book of
magic?"

"The Oracle says the troops must be disposed first."

"Damn!" Stile swore. "Send my coldest regards to that
inscrutable machine. I'll do what I can."

"I shall keep thy friend the troll statue safe for thy
return with the book."

"Thanks," Stile said gruffly. He played a bar of music
on the harmonica, took Sheen by the hand, and spelled
them to the Brown Demesnes.

They popped in at the main receiving hall. The child
Adept was waiting. "Oh, I'm so glad thou art back. Blue!"
she exclaimed. "And thou too. Lady Machine. Dost thou
like being a golem?"

"It's wonderful. Lady Adept," Sheen agreed.

The child's mouth went round with astonishment. Then
she giggled. "I guess thou meanest me. Nobody ever called
me Lady before, 'cause I'm just a girl."
, "That's more than 111 ever be," Sheen said.

Stile had to interrupt. He had very little time. "Brown, a
troll rescued me from confinement, but he got turned to
stone by the sun. Can you animate stone?"

"Oh, sure, some. But you know, it doesn't change the
substance. He'd be awful heavy if thou didst not spell him

Juxtaposition                     267

back to flesh, and he'd crack when struck hard. I work
with wood because it is strong and light, and the Lady
Machine was pre-formed, so she was okay. But a stone
troll—"

"I see the problem. I think I could turn him to wood,
but I'm not sure about flesh."

"Perhaps with the aid of the book of magic," Sheen
reminded him.

"Of course. That should do it."

"Thou couldst just about create a troll from scratch,"
Sheen pointed out. "Make a figure, enchant it to flesh,
have the Brown Adept animate it, and Clef could pipe a
soul into it."

"If we had a soul," Stile agreed. "That's the one thing
magic can't generate."

"I know," she said sadly.

"My golems and the wolves have spread the word
among all the creatures of Phaze," Brown said. "All but
the goblins and monsters have joined. But they know not
what to do now."

"I wish I could tell them," Stile said. "I am the victim of
a prophecy. I don't know where to tell them to go."

"Well, maybe thou canst improvise," Brown suggested.
"The troops will dissipate if not encouraged."

"So the Oracle seems to think, though I hardly have
time to—"

"Which means we must hurry," Sheen said, enjoying
this.

"And I thought Citizenship was uncomplicatedl" Stile
worked out several travel-spells, and they were off.

First stop was the werewolves. Kurrelgyre was there,
but the Pack had been depleted by the wolves and bitches
assigned to accompany the wooden golems. Kurrelgyre
shifted immediately to man-form to shake Stile's hand.
"But this bitch—I know her not," he said, looking at
Sheen. "Unless—could it be?"

"This is the robot-golem Sheen, my Proton fiancee,"
Stile said. "Thy suggestion was good; the Brown Adept
animated her."

"At least conjure her fitting apparel," the werewolf said.
"She is too luscious a morsel to go naked hereabouts."

268 juxtaposition juxtaposition 269

Clothing! Stile had forgotten all about that for Sheen.
Quickly he conjured her a pretty dress and slippers, as
befitted a Lady of Phaze.

"But I can not wear clothing!" she protested. "I'm a
serf!"

"Not here," Stile assured her. "In this frame all people
wear clothes." He eyed her appraisingly. "They do befit
thee."

"We are ready for action," Kurrelgyre said eagerly.
"But where is it? Whom do we fight?"

"I know not," Stile admitted. "The prophecy decrees it;

that is all."

The werewolf sighed. "Prophecies are oft subject to mis-
interpretation. I had hoped this would be not that type."

Stile agreed. "The animalheads are prophesied to lose
half their number. I fear this will be typical. I presume
much of the damage will be done by enchantments hurled
by the enemy Adepts, and by the ravages of their minions.
But the other creatures of Phaze will be on thy side—the
unicorns, elves, ogres, and such. Do thou gather thy
wolves and be ready for action at any time. I know no
more. I am but a chip afloat on a stormy sea, doing what I
must do without much personal volition."

Sheen smiled knowingly. This was a concept a robot
was in a position to understand.

"Surely die enemy will seek to destroy thee," the wolf
said.

"The enemy Adepts have been trying! I hope to jump
around swiftly in a random pattern, avoiding them until I
return to Proton."

"I fear for thee, friend. I have a few wolves left who can
guard thee—"

"Nay, I'd best travel light. Just be ready with thy Pack
when I need thee!"

"Aye, I shall, and the other wolf packs too." They
shook hands.

Stile spelled himself and Sheen to the next stop: the
ogres. These ones certainly were ready for action. Each
huge creature was armed with a monstrous club and
seemed capable of smashing boulders with single blows.

This was a truly impressive army. There were perhaps four
hundred fighting creatures in view.

As quickly as possible. Stile explained to the ogre leader
that the moment for action was just about at hand. "But
we don't know exactly where trouble will begin," he said.
"Only that it will be terrible, horrible, violent, and bloody."

Slow smiles cracked the ogres' brute faces. They were
eager for this sort of fun. Stile knew he had struck the
right note.

"Just remember," he cautioned them. "All the organized
creatures of Phaze will be on thy side, except the Goblins.
So don't attack elves or giants or werewolves—"

"Awww," the leader grumbled. But he had it straight.
No unauthorized bloodshed.

Stile spelled on to the vampires, where he consulted
with his friend Vodlevile, who was no chief but whom
Stile trusted. The flock promised to be alert.

So it went, touching bases with the animalheads, snow-
demons, giants, trolls, and Little Folk. He did not go to
the Platinum Elves, fearing an Adept trap there; instead he
met with the gnomes of the Purple Mountains. These Lit-
tle Folk were akin to the goblins of the White Mountains,
but had elected to join the compatible elves. It was as, if
the more pleasant climate made them nicer creatures.

The gnome males were ugly, but the females, the
gnomides, were quite pretty little misses, each holding a
fine bright diamond. These were, indeed, the workers of
precious stones, and their wares were even more valuable
than those of the Platinum Mound Folk. They quickly
agreed to pass the word among the elven tribes. "There
will be thousands of little warriors awaiting thy call to
action. Adept. Only save Phaze, and all is even!"

Stile hoped he could! "Dost thou know of any Adept
presence in the Elven Demesnes?" Stile asked as he got
ready to leave. "I fear an ambush and marvel that none
has occurred."

"We know of none, and our prophecy book has no
mention of harm to thee here. Adept," the gnome chief
answered. "But Adepts are devious—no offense proffered."

"Devious indeed!" Stile agreed.




270

Juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

271

"Surely it is the Lady Blue they will stake out," Sheen
murmured.

"Aye. Yet must I see her and advise the Herd Stallion."

"Send me first, to spring the trap," she offered.

Stile demurred, but she insisted. Conscious of the dan-
ger and of his vanishing time, he had to agree. He spelled
her to the unicorn herd for two minutes, then brought her
back to the gnome demesnes.

"No sign of trouble there," she reported, seeming ex-
hilarated by the excursion. "Belle, the pretty unicorn mare,
is there^ asking to join the herd. They have not admitted
her, but are considering it. Thy friend Clip is quite worked
up."

"He would be. He's smitten by her. No Adepts?"

"The Herd Stallion is sure there are no Adepts there,
and no Adept magic in the vicinity."

"Good enough." Stile spelled the two of them to the
herd.

It was as Sheen had said. All was peaceful. The uni-
corns were grazing in a loose circle on an open hillside,
with Neysa remaining in the center. Stile and Sheen landed
beside the circle, for magic was repulsed within it.

"May I go in and meet Neysa this time?" Sheen in-
quired wistfully.

Stile knew she identified with the unicorn, for Sheen
and Neysa had been his two closest companions before
he encountered the Lady Blue. "111 ask the Herd Stallion,"
he said.

He asked, and the Stallion acquiesced with suitable
grace. Sheen left them to enter the circle, while Stile
briefed the Stallion. "That's all I know," he concluded. "I
conjecture that the Adepts will move in force when I try to
transport the Phazite, perhaps sending dragons to inter-
fere. Someone will need to intercept those monsters."

"We shall be there," the Stallion agreed grimly.

The Lady Blue had remained back until Stile finished
with the Stallion. Then she came up to kiss Stile. "So nice
to meet the Lady Sheen again," she murmured. "She will
make thee an excellent wife in Proton."

No use to remind her that all he wanted was one wife,
anywherel She knew it.

Sheen and Neysa approached. "We'd like to interview
Belle," Sheen said. "We want to know if she was involved
in the luring of Clip, or whether only her image was used
without her knowledge. She may be innocent."

Stile was curious about that himself. A few minutes
remained. He glanced askance at the Herd Stallion, who
blew a short chord of assent, permitting Neysa to depart
the circle of the herd briefly for that purpose, since there
was no immediate danger.

"I can question her with a spell," Stile said. "Time is
short, but this concerns me too." For that luring had been
part of the trap for him; it had made Clip hostage and
brought Stile to the goblin demesnes. If Belle were actually
an agent of the Adepts—

Clip joined them. He was the most concerned of all.
Belle could never be his, of course; if she joined this herd,
she would be serviced by this Herd Stallion. Still, Stile was
sure Clip would rather know her to be innocent and have
her near and safe.

The five—Stile, two women, two unicorns—approached
Belle. Stile worked out a suitable truth-spell in his mind. It
would take only a moment to ascertain Belle's guilt or
innocence, and her prospective admittance to this herd
probably depended on his finding.

Belle stopped grazing and raised her head as the party
drew near. She was indeed the prettiest unicorn Stile had
seen. Her coat was a deep purple, and in the bright sun-
light her mane, tail, hooves, and horn glittered irides-
cently. Stile remembered how she had changed forms to a
large cat and a blue heron during the Unolympics dance.
She blew a lovely bells-ringing note of inquiry.

"I am the Blue Adept," Stile said. "I have come to—"

Belle abruptly shook herself, as an animal would to dry
off after a soaking. Droplets flew out all over. Clip and
Neysa leaped between Stile and Belle, intercepting the
spray. Sheen and the Lady Blue flung their arms around
Stile, embracing him from either side, their dresses flaring
out to wrap about him.

"Hey, I'm not afraid of a little water!" he exclaimed,
struggling free. Both his unicorn companions were wet,
and the dresses of both ladies were dripping.




272

Juxtaposition

juxtaposition

273

The Lady Blue contemplated him wide-eyed. "Who art
thou?" she asked. "Do I know thee?"

Sheen laughed. "Dost thou forget thy husband. Lady? I
doubt it!"

But the Lady Blue's confusion seemed genuine. "I know
him not. I know thee not. What am I doing amidst these
animals?"

Stile now observed that Clip and Neysa seemed similarly
bemused. They were backing off from Belle and each other
as if encountering strangers.

"I think it's amnesia," Sheen said. "I don't think they're
fooling."

"Lethe!" Stile exclaimed. "Water of Lethe—Belle was
doused with it!"

"I thought it was poison," Sheen said. "It can't affect
me, of course—but I think your friends have just given up
their memories for you. For thee."

"They shall have them back!" Stile cried, his knees feel-
ing weak at the narrowness of his escape. Everyone had
caught on except him! He cudgeled his brain to evoke the
proper counterspell. Lethe was one of the streams of
Hades, mythologically; what was the opposite one, the
stream of memory? Every magic had its countermagic.

Mnemosyne, that was it! Had he been doused by Lethe,
he never would have been able to remember that bit of
mythology! In fact, this had been a devastatingly neat
trap. Water was harmless, so would not alert the unicorns;

the water of Lethe was natural to Phaze, so did not reek of
Adept enchantment. Stile, struck by it, would not suffer
physically and would experience no mental anguish in his
forgetfulness. Therefore the trap had not been obvious to
the Oracle, who would have been alert for more dramatic
mischief. Only the instant reaction of his companions had
saved Stile. For they could not have restored his memory,
had he been caught; they were not Adepts. He was the one
person who had to be protected.

But the trap had missed him, and therefore would come
to nothing. Stile played his harmonica, then sang: "Lethe
made my friends forget; Mnemosyne shall this offset."

A cloud formed, instantly raining on the group. The
water of memory doused them all.

The Lady Blue put her hand to her soaking hair. "Oh, I
remember!" she exclaimed, horrified. "My Lord Blue, I
forgot thee!"

"Because thou didst take the water meant for me," Stile
said. "And Clip and Neysa too; all acted on my behalf."

But he was running out of time. Quickly he set a truth-
spell on Belle—and established that she was innocent of
any complicity in the plot or in the temptation of Clip.
The Adepts had used her without her consent, and the
Lethe had eliminated her memory. They had put her under
a geis to shake herself dry at the moment the Blue Adept
came near, without knowing the significance of her act. So
she was clean, despite being the essence of the trap.

"Yet can we not tolerate her like in our midst," the
Herd Stallion decided grimly. "Shame has she brought on
me and my herd; I thought to protect thee here. Adept."

Against that Stile could not argue. The Stallion's pride
had been infringed, and he was the proudest of animals.
Unicorns were the most stubborn of creatures, once set on
a course. There would be no relenting.

Sadly, Stile and his friends watched Belle depart, re-
jected again. She changed to heron-form and winged into
the forest, lovely and lonesome. Stile knew Clip was hurt-
ing most of all.

Stile took Sheen's hand again and spelled them to a new
crossing point. They negotiated the curtain and ran a short
distance to a dome. Sheen, not suffering from the lack of
oxygen, said, "I wish I could have forgotten too." She
meant she wished she could be alive.

They set up in a Citizen's transport capsule programmed
with a random address near to Xanadu, the tite of the
Citizens' business meeting. This was the safest place to be
in Proton. Citizens were fiercely jealous of their privacy,
so capsules were as secure as modem technology could
make them.

"Dare we pick up Mellon?" Stile asked.

Sheen checked, using the obscure coding only her ma-
chine friends could decipher. "No, he is under observation,
as is your home dome," she reported. "They are letting
him work with your fortune, even facilitating his success,




274                     Juxtaposition

perhaps promoting him as another lure for you. Another
ambush."

"My enemies do seem to work that way. How much has
he parlayed my net worth into now?"

"Between ninety and ninety-five kilograms of Proton-
ite," she said after a pause. "It is growing at the rate of
several kilos per hour. It is a remarkable display of finan-
cial expertise. You will have close to a hundred kilos by
the time of the Citizens' meeting."

"But that's not enoughl" Stile exclaimed, chagrined. "I
have bets that will double and redouble it at the meeting—
but that means I must have a base of at least five hundred
kilos if I am to make my target fortune—and I have the
feeling I'd better make it."

"Mellon is aware of that, but there are limits to what he
can do in a short time. He has tripled the stake you pro-
vided, but suggests that more of your peculiar expertise
may be required."

"Rare praise from him!" But Stile frowned. "I have
about fifteen minutes until that meeting. How can I quin-
tuple my fortune in that time without exposing myself to
assassination?"

"I do not know," she said. "You can no longer make
wagers with individual Citizens; few have the resources to
operate in that league, and none of these will bet with you.
Your record is too impressive, and they know they can
eliminate you merely by preventing you from further in-
creasing your fortune, so they have established a mora-
torium on all wagers with you."

"So, by their rules, they will win. If they don't manage
to kill me, they will simply vote me out."

"Yes. I am sorry. Stile."

"Let me think." Stile concentrated. He had been in a
bad situation before, deep in the goblin demesnes, and had
escaped by using the curtain. The curtain would not help
him now; he would use up most of his time just getting to
it and would then miss his mandatory appearance at the
Citizens' meeting in Xanadu—in thirteen minutes. Yet
there was something—

For once his brain balked, refusing to yield its notion.

juxtaposition                     275

"Sheen, I need your analytical faculty," he said. "How can
the curtain get me out of this one?"

"There is a way?"

"There must be. The assorted prophecies indicate I can
somehow prevail, and my intuition says so—but I can't
draw it forth. Maybe it is far-fetched. Most likely I need to
open a new dimension of insight. How can the curtain
provide me with another four hundred kilograms of Pro-
tonite?"

"A borrowing against the Phazite to be transferred?"

"Would the Citizens accept such credit as wagering cur-
rency?"

She checked with Mellon. "By no means. It is hardly to
their interest to assist you by any liberalization of their
policies. You can use only your personal fortune and any
direct proxies you may possess."

"Proxies! Who would give me proxies?" Twelve min-
utes. "Guide us toward Xanadu; I'm going to be there
regardless."

"Friends who could not attend personally might issue—"

"I have few Citizen friends, some of whom are prone to
betray me—and they can certainly attend the meeting if
they want to, so wouldn't need to issue proxies. I suspect
many Citizens will skip it, just as shareholders have his-
torically ignored their vested interests, but I can't get the
proxies of disinterested strangers."

"Unless they are interested, but on business elsewhere.
Maybe off-planet, or across the curtain."

"I can't see any friends of mine crossing right now.
Most of my friends are on the other side, in Phaze, and
can't cross, because—" Then it burst upon him. "Their
other selves! How many of my Phaze friends have Proton-
selves who are Citizens?"

"That would be difficult to survey in ten minutes."

"The Brown Adept! She could be one, who may not
even know of her alternate existence. Get her on the holo
—and have your friends check her possible identity in
Proton. We'll have to see if Kurrelgyre the werewolf
knows of any prospects. And the vampires—can your
friends coordinate to—" He stopped. "No, of course such
a survey would take many days. Only a computer—"




276                    juxtaposition

"The Oracle!" Sheen exclaimed. "It would knowl"

"Getoniti"
The Brown Adept appeared, looldng perplexed. "Thou

canst not cross the curtain?" Stile asked her. Seeing her
nod, he continued: "Is thine other self by any chance a Cit-
izen, as the selves of Adepts tend to be?" Again she
nodded. "Then see if thou canst convince her to give me

her proxy for her wealth."

"But I can not meet mine other selfl" she protested.

"No one can—"

A second image appeared, as Sheen's friends contacted
Brown's other self. Both girls stared at each other, startled.
Stile's special East Pole communications setup had made
possible what had never been possible before. Selves were

meeting.

There was a confused interchange, but in a moment the
Brown Adept had convinced her Citizen self, whose nature
was very similar to her own, not only to provide her proxy
but to contact all her Citizen friends and beg them to do
likewise. The two children smiled at each other, liking
each other, enjoying this shared adventure.

Now Clef appeared, replacing the girls. "Great notion,
Stilel The Oracle knew you would think of that at the
proper time and is now feeding the information to the
Game Computer of Proton, who will have Sheen's friends
contact all likely prospects. There turn out to be several
hundred scattered through the tribes and domes, many of
whom do not know of their other selves or even of the
other frame. We shall have results for you in minutes."

Minutes were all they had. Because of the assassins they
knew would be watching for Stile, Sheen quickly made
herself up as a cleaning menial, smudged and ugly, hauling
an enormous trash bin. There were always fragments of
refuse -that the automatic cleaners could not get, which
had to be removed by hand. Her friends the self-willed
machines scheduled her to police the central court of
Xanadu, where the Citizens' business meeting was to he
held. She trundled her bin along the service halls to the

proper dome.

Sheen entered it by a service tunnel, passing the com-
puter checkpoint without difficulty, since of course her

juxtaposition                     277

friends covertly facilitated this. Questing efficiently for
refuse, in a dome that was spotless, she passed through a
series of chambers containing dioramas—alcoves with
deep, realistically painted walls, inset with lifelike statues
and appurtenances. She paused briefly at each, on occa-
sion actually spying some bit of paper that she speared on
her pointed stick and deposited in the half-full bin.

Stile, concealed within the bin, peeked out through a
smudged window normally intended for the inspection of
refuse from outside. Only a careful inspection would have
betrayed him, and no one even glanced at this unit.

As they entered each chamber, it illuminated and a
recording played, providing its bit of mythology. Stile, dis-
tracted by his need to retain his Citizenship, was neverthe-
less fascinated. Citizens never spared expense to achieve
their background effects, but this was impressive even
among Citizen artifacts.

The first chamber was a primitive room, eighteenth-
or nineteenth-century British, in which a man slumped
over a wooden table. He had an antique feather quill in
hand and was writing something on parchment or crude
paper. "One day in 1797," the announcer said, "the poet
Samuel Taylor Coleridge, feeling indisposed, obtained a
prescription that caused him to fall asleep while reading a
travel book relating to the Mongol Dynasty of China.
Some suggest it was actually opium he took that put him
into a temporary trance. He continued in this state for
three hours, during which time he had a phenomenal vi-
sion. On awakening, he took pen, ink, and paper and
began recording the experience in the form of a poem,
titled Kubia Khan." The recording ended, leaving the poet
amidst his labor.

Stile was familiar with the story and with the poem, but
was intrigued by the realism of the diorama. Every detail
seemed perfect. But more than that, he was moved by the
similarity of his own experience when he had fallen into a
recurring vision of Clef's introduction to Phaze and later
verified that all of it was true. There had been his first
experience of the juxtaposition of frames! The poet Cole-
ridge would certainly have understood.

The next chamber had a new episode. The scene was of




278

Juxtaposition

a man standing just outside an open door, evidently a
villager. "Hardly had the poet recorded thirty lines, the
mere introduction to his vision masterpiece, before he was
interrupted by a person from the nearby village of Por-
lock, who detained him for over an hour. When Samuel
finally was able to return to his writing, he was dismayed
to discover that his vision had dissipated. He could recall
none of the marvelous lines that had coursed through his
brain, and could write no more."

Ah, yes. Stile thought. The notorious person from Por-
lock, whose ill-timed interference had destroyed what
might have been the creation of the ages. In Stile's own
case, his poem had not been interrupted; it had become his
Tourney winner, though his ability hardly compared to
that of Coleridge.

The third chamber began the presentation of the poem
itself. The diorama showed a view of a walled enclosure
encompassing a number of square kilometers. There were
copses of trees, neat meadows, and spring-fed streams—a
wholly delightful hunting preserve, reminiscent of Phaze,
stocked for the Emperor's pleasure with a number of fine
game animals. Within it was a prefabricated kind of palace
in the Oriental mode, luxuriously appointed. This, the nar-
rator explained, was the palace of Xanadu as described in
the text Samuel had been reading, set up by Kublai, grand-
son of the conqueror Genghis Khan.

The fourth chamber showed the caverns of a great
underground river, winding down to a somber subter-
ranean lake. "And this is the one described in Samuel's
vision in a dream," the narrator said. Obviously the poet's
imagination had enhanced the original. The narrator now
quoted the opening stanza of the poem: "In Xanadu did
Kubia Khan/ A stately pleasure-dome decree:/ Where
Alph, the sacred river, ran/ Through caverns measureless
to man/ Down to a sunless sea."

The fifth chamber was the main one—and it was truly
impressive. It was a tremendous cavern whose walls were
of ice—actually, glass and mirrors cunningly crafted to
appear glacial. "It was a miracle of rare device," the nar-
rator continued, quoting further from the poem. "A sunny
pleasure-dome with caves of ice!"




Juxtaposition                     279

And within this marvelous setting was the palace of
Xanadu as conceived by Proton artisans. It was the most
impressive of all. It was fashioned of bright metal, bluish
at the base, golden yellow in the mid-levels, and purple at
the top. Lights played glancingly across it, causing the
colors to shift shades, with green showing at some angles
in a kind of pseudoiridescence.

The architecture was stranger yet. The structure was all
steps and corrugations and cubes, rising into artificial per-
spectives like so many sections of pyramids. The walls
were thin, so that the stepped surface of one floor became
the stepped surface of the ceiling of the chamber beneath
it, and the walls were fashioned in an intermittent, maze-
like network. There was no proper roof, only brief terraces
of many levels, expanding from the tops of the walls. In
one sense, the palace was like old-fashioned bleachers in a
stadium gone haywire.

Citizens stood and sat on the steps and terraces and
leaned against the walls. Many had donned appropriate
costumes, resembling those of the medieval Mongol nobil-
ity. But any implication that this was a festive occasion
was unfounded; it was ruin and murder these Citizens had
in mind, for one who threatened their control of this
planet. They dealt with such a challenge as the Savage
Mongols would have.

Sheen drew her trash bin quietly around the chamber,
spearing stray refuse, ignored by all as the meeting began.
The Chairone called it to order. The first item of business
was a tabulation of those present; no late entrances were
permitted. This of course was to prevent Stile or any of his
friends from arriving in the middle to protest his loss of
Citizenship. The tabulation was made by oral roll call, to
prevent any interference by a computer; evidently the
other Citizens had some dawning notion of Stile's connec-
tions there. Thus it was time-consuming—and that pleased
Stile, who needed every extra minute to obtain his proxies.
He knew the computers and self-willed machines could
work quickly, but he had given them very little time.

"Stile," the roll caller called. Then, with grim hope:

"Not present? Let it be noted that—"

Stile burst out from the trash bin, sending dust and




280                    Juxtaposition

pieces of paper flying. "Beware! Beware!" he cried, quot-
ing from Kubia Khan. "His flashing eyes, his floating hairl/
Weave a circle round him thrice,/ And close your eyes
with holy dread,/ For he on honey-dew hath fed,/ And
drunk the milk of Paradise."

For surely Stile was an apparition, confounding these
evil-meaning people. In Xanadu, the weaving of a triple
circle around such a wild man would help confine his
malice, but here they would try to do it financially. The
quotation was doubly significant here, because Stile really
had fed on honey-dew and drunk the milk of Paradise—
his experience in the magic realm of Phaze. And as it
happened, this was where Coleridge's poem broke off, in-
terrupted by the person from Porlock; no one knew what
would follow.

"Present," the roll caller agreed glumly, and continued
with the tabulation while Sheen cleaned Stile off. Stile saw
the Rifleman, Waldens, Merle, and others he had come to
know, but could not be certain what side any of them were
on. He knew he would soon find out.

The first order of business was the clarification of finan-
cial credits, since voting would be strictly by wealth. Each
Citizen made an entry with the Chairone: so many kilos
and grams of Protonite as of this moment. Another Citi-
zen verified those credits with the Records Computer, and
a third issued tokens representative of Protonite, in kilo
and gram units. It was much like buying chips for a big
game of poker—and this would surely be the biggest game
ever.

When Stile's turn came, there was a complication. "My
fortune must be established by the settlement of two bets
at this time," he said. "First, a wager with a consortium of
Citizens that I would or would not appear at this meeting
alive. I believe I have won that bet."

"Granted," the Chairone agreed soberly. He had played
an identification beam across Stile, verifying that he was
no android or robot replica. "What is your basic fortune
prior to that decision?"

"My financial adviser will have to provide that informa-
tion. He also has a number of proxies that should be
included."

Juxtaposition                     281

"Proxies?"

"I have complete authority to dispose the proxied funds,
including wagering with them," Stile said. "You may verify
that with the Records Computer." He hoped that his
friends had succeeded in amassing the necessary total. If
not, he was likely to be finished.

Mellon was admitted. He provided data on Stile's assets
and proxies. The Chairone's eyes widened. "But this is
more than six hundred kilos, totall"

Six hundred kilos! The computers had come through
handsomely!

"I protest!" a Citizen cried. "He can't use proxies to
multiply his own fortunel"

"Sir, I have here the proxy forms," Mellon said
smoothly. "As you will see, they are carefully worded, and
this particular use is expressly granted. For the purpose of
this meeting, all proxies are part of Stile's personal for-
tune."

The Chairone checked again with the Records Com-
puter. Lugubriously he reported that it was true. By the
laws of this game. Stile could consider the proxies to be
part of his betting assets. He also verified the terms of the
survival wager. This, too, was tight. Mellon had done his
job expertly, allowing no technicality to void the assets.

"Citizen Stile, having won his wager by appearing at
this meeting alive, has herewith doubled his fortune," the
Chairone announced, "to twelve hundred point six two
eight kilograms of Protonite."

Stile saw a number of Citizens wince. Those were surely
his enemies of the consortium, who had tried to assas-
sinate him for profit. They had paid for that attempt with
their wealth. That was satisfying!

"And the other bet, placed by proxy," Stile said. "That I
would or would not be seduced by Citizen Merle by this
time. I believe she will verify that I won that one too."
This was chancy; he had indeed won, but Merle had be-
trayed him once. What would he do if she lied?

Merle came forward, looking slender and young and
demure. "It is true. I failed."

"I protest!" yet another Citizen cried. "She reneged to
help Stile, because she is enamored of him!"




282 Juxtaposition

Merle tamed on the man. "I am enamored, but it is
hardly my custom to void an assignation from any over-
dose of personal attraction. I want him more than ever.
But pressure was brought to bear on me to kill him; in-
stead I confined him. Under the circumstance, it is not
surprising he was less than enthusiastic about seduction.
At any rate, my feeling was not part of the bet, as I
understand it. Only whether I did or did not succeed. It is
always foolish to place one's trust in the activities of a
woman."

Stile found himself forgiving Merle's betrayal. She had
certainly made it pay for him. The Citizens had no refuta-
tion. The bet stood—and Stile's fortune was doubled
again, to almost two and a half metric tons of Protonite.
He was for the moment the wealthiest Citizen of the
planet.

"I dare say those who gave me their proxies will be
pleased when they receive their fortunes back, quad-
rupled," he murmured to Mellon. He knew there would be
trouble, as angry Citizens checked to discover how he had
obtained those proxies so rapidly, and that this could lead
to the exposure of the self-willed machines, but this was
now so dose to the final confrontation that it should make
no difference. Already the frames were drawing together,
soon the juxtaposition should become apparent. He
thought he saw little waverings in the icy walls of the
cavern, but that might be his imagination.

The remaining Citizens were duly registered. The next
item on the agenda was the motion to revoke Stile's Citi-
zenship. It was presented for a vote without debate. This
was no democracy; it was a power play. The issue would
be decided rapidly, in much the manner of a wager.

The vote was conducted by scale. There was a huge
balancing scale in the center of the court. Citizens were
free to set their token weights on either, both, or neither
side of the scale, causing the balance to shift in favor of
or against the motion.

They did so, filing by to deposit their votes. The model
weights were miniatures, weighing only a thousandth of
the real Protonite, so that a metric ton weighed only a
single kilogram. Otherwise this vote would have been im-

Juxtaposition                     283

possibly cumbersome. Stile's own tokens weighed two
point four kilos, not two and a half tons.

The Citizens were not all against him. Many protested
the attempt to disenfranchise one of their number, regard-
less of the provocation, so put their grams in the RETAIN
side. Stile, uncertain how the final tally would go, did not
put all his own grams in at once. If he did that, others
might be put off by his display of enormous wealth and
vote against him. But if he let too much weight overbal-
ance against him, others might feel his cause was lost and
join the winning side. So he strove to keep the scales in
balance, filling in the deficit with small portions of his own
fortune. Would he have enough at the end to prevail?
Since he had amassed the fortune the self-willed machines
had deemed necessary, he should be all right. But still it
was close, and others were watching his moves, countering
him along the way.

Steadily the Citizens voted, and steadily the total went
against him. Apparently sentiment had intensified. Stile's
fortune was dissipating too swiftly; he saw he would run
out before the end.

Remorselessly it came. He put his last three grams
down, the dregs of an enormous fortune, tipping the scales
his way—and the next Citizen put five on the other side,
tipping them back. Stile could no longer bail himself out.
So close!

Then Merle stepped forward, carrying ten grams she
had saved. "All finished except me?" she inquired brightly.
No one contested it. "Then it seems I am to decide the
issue. I perceive Stile is behind by a mere three grams, of
some ten tons deposited, and here I hold ten grams."

She was enjoying this, making her little show before a
rapt audience. No one said a word; no one knew which
way she would go. She had scores to settle with both
sides.

"Now I asked you for a liaison, you intriguing little
man, and you turned me down," she continued with a flirt
of her hip. She was costumed in the Xanadu fashion, but
somehow, now, the conservative attire of a dressmaker's
notion of thirteenth-century China became provocative on
her. Whether by nature, discipline, or rejuvenation, her




284 juxtaposition

figure was finely formed. She reminded Stile somewhat of
the Yellow Adept, though she was not Yellow's other self.

"Very few men of any station turn me down," she said
with pride. "For that insult, one gram against you." She
flipped a token onto the negative plate. "And you did it to
win your bet, putting finance over romance. Fie againi"
She flipped another token to the same plate. Stile was now
five grams down.

Merle inspected him, walking around him as she might
a prize animal on sale. "Yet you are a handsome bantam,
as well formed and healthy as any man I have encoun-
tered, who has quite smitten my withered old heart. One
for your fine miniature physique." She tossed a gram to
Stile's side of the scales. "And others did force me to act
against you, catching me in a temporary monetary bind.
I resent that. Another for you."

She was teasing him, he knew, but he couldn't help
hoping. Now he was only three grams behind again, and
she had six remaining. How would they be played?

"You have rare integrity," she continued. "You are true
to your word and to your own. I like that very well. Three
for your personality, which I would have respected less,
had I been able to corrupt it." She added three to Stile's
side, and slowly the scales shifted until the two plates were
even.

"But now your bet is won," she said. "I failed to seduce
you, and those who bet on your fall have paid off. There
remain no commitments." She glanced meaningfully at the
scales. "Five tons on each side. All is in balance. Now,
Stile, for these remaining tokens—may I purchase your
favor this time?"

Oh, nol She was still looking for that liaison! She was
propositioning him before the entire business meeting—
and how heavily her three remaining grams weighed! The
prior bet was over; he could accept her offer now and have
the victory, or decline it and lose his Citizenship and his
cause.

Yet this was not the way Stile could be bought. "I am
no gigolo," he said shortly. "I have a fiancee."

"And a wife, as if such things related." She paused,
contemplating him as she might a difficult child. "So you

Juxtaposition                     285

employ such pretexts to refuse me again." She flipped a
gram onto the negative plate, and the balance tipped
against him.

Stile tried not to show his wince. For such foolishness,
she was set to ruin him. The enemy Citizens began to
smile, perceiving the fix he was in. Victory—or honor.

"Now I have only two remaining —just enough to sway
the vote in your favor. Stile," Merle said. "After this there
will be no opportunity for me to change my mind. I mean
to have what I want, and I am willing to pay. Again, I ask
you for your favor."

Stile hesitated. She could break him—and would. Citi-
zens could be fanatical about being denied, and women
could be savage about being spumed. Yet to win his case
this way, publicly yielding to her—

"Ask your fiancee," Merle suggested. "I doubt she wants
you to throw away your fortune and hers on so slight a
matter. One hour with me—and I promise it will be a
pleasant one—and the rest of your life with your chosen
ones. Is it so difficult a choice?"

Stile looked at Sheen. He had suggested to her before
that she should be jealous of any other attachments he
might have, and he could see that she had taken the advice
seriously and reprogrammed her responses accordingly.
Yet she feared for his wealth and his life if he resisted
Merle. She wanted him to do the expedient thing, regard-
less what it cost her. She was a machine, but also a
woman; her logic urged one thing, her sex another.

He thought of the Lady Blue and knew that she would
feel much the same. The Lady Blue knew she had his love;

his body was less significant. Merle was offering a phe-
nomenal payoff for a liaison that probably would be very
easy, physically. He could win everything.

But he was not a machine or a woman. "No," he said.
"If I compromise myself now, by selling myself openly for
power, I am corruptible and can not be trusted with that
power."

He heard a faint sound, almost a whimper. Sheen knew
he courted disaster.

Merle's visage hardened. "Lo, before all these assem-
bled, you deny me yet again. You will throw away every-




286                    Juxtaposition

thing to spite met" She lifted the last two tokens in her
hand, taking aim at the negative plate. The smiles of the
enemy Citizens broadened, and Stile suspected that if he
had it to do over, he would decide the other way. How
could he throw away everything like this, not only tor his
friends but for the survival of the frames themselves?
What kind of honor was it that led directly to total de-
struction?

But Merle paused—and Stile realized she was teasing

the other Citizens too. 'Tet it is your very quality of
honor that most intrigues me. Every man is said to have
his price; it is evident that neither money nor power is
your price for the slightest of things. In what realm, then,
is your price to be found? You are a man who does what
he chooses, not what he is forced to do, though the fires-
that-Hell-hath-not do bar the way. A man of rarest cour-
age. For that I must reluctantly grant you one." And she
tossed one token into Stile's plate, causing the scales to
balance again. Oh, she was teasing them alll

"While I," she continued, frowning again, "have not
always been mistress of my decision. Threatened similarly,
I capitulated and betrayed you. I locked you away in the
mines until the meeting should pass. I did not know your
mechanical friends would summon a creature from across
the curtain to rescue you. So for that betrayal I must pay;

I am of lesser merit than you, and perhaps that is the
underlying reason you do not find me worthy. Stile, I
apologize for that betrayal. Do you accept?"

"That I accept," he said, privately glad she had said it.
She had indeed shown him the kind of pressure that could

be applied to a Citizen.

Merle tossed the last token onto Stile's plate, tipping the
final balance in his favor. Stile was aware that she had
acted exactly as she had intended from the outset; her
deliberations had all been show. But he was weak with
relief. She could so readily have torpedoed him!

The enemy Citizens were grimly silent. Their plot had
failed, by the whim of a woman. Stile had retained his
Citizenship and was now the most powerful Citizen of all.
They could not prevent him from marrying Sheen and
designating her his heir, which meant in turn that the

Juxtaposition                     287

precedent would be established for recognition of his allies
the self-willed machines and for the improvement of their
position in the society of Proton. Assuming the coming
juxtaposition and alignment of power did not change that
in any way.

"The business of this meeting is concluded," the Chair-
one announced. "We shall proceed to entertainment as we
disperse." Music rose up, and refreshment robots appeared.

The lead theme was played by a damsel with a dulcimer,
the precursor to the piano. She struck the taut strings with
two leather-covered little hammers and played most pret-
tily. This was in keeping with the Xanadu theme, since it
had been mentioned in Coleridge's poem.

Citizens started dancing, just as if nothing special had
happened. Since few were conversant with the modes of
dancing of medieval China, they indulged in conventional
•freestyle ballroom efforts, with a wide diversity. The in-
creasing loudness of the music, as a full orchestra mani-
fested in the chamber, made conversation impossible ex-
cept at mouth-to-ear range.

Stile took Sheen, who had cleaned herself up and made
herself pretty again, and danced her into the throng. There
were more male Citizens than female Citizens, so some
serfs had to be co-opted for the pleasures. In any event,
she was his fiancee, and he felt safest with her. "Get me
over to Merle," he said. "Then switch partners."

She stiffened, then relaxed, realizing his motive. For
there remained the matter of the book of magic, which
Merle surely had. Stile knew her price. She had bargained
for seduction twice, increasing the stakes—and had re-
served the greatest stake for the final try.

'There is evil here," Sheen murmured into his ear. She
was an excellent dancer; he had not had opportunity to
discover this before. "Many Citizens remain hostile, know-
ing you threaten their power. They have weapons. I fear
they will attempt to assassinate you openly here."

"I have to recover that book," Stile said. "I need it in
Phaze."

"Then this time you will have to meet her price," Sheen
said sternly. "She will never let you get away the third
time. Don't dawdle here; they mean to kill you before the




288 Juxtaposition

juxtaposition is complete, and I can't protect you from
them all. We must escape this place swiftly."

Stile knew it was true. Perhaps in time he could recover
the book from Merle on his own terms—but he had no
time. Without that book, the Oracle had in effect assured
him, he could not complete his mission. He also needed it
to restore Trool the troll before the frames separated. He
would be criminally foolish to throw away all that for
such a minor thing as an hour's acquiescence. He had
already pushed his luck too far, as Merle had knowingly
shown him. The past few minutes had caused him to rede-
£ne his concept of honor somewhat; he had to consider the
greatest good for the frames, not just his own position.

They reached Merle in the crowd. She was dancing with
an imposing Central Asiatic Turk. "Trade partners, Tur-
key," Stile said.

The man started to object, but then got a better look at
Sheen and decided he had the best of it. Stile danced away
with Merle.

"That was neatly executed," Merle said, dancing with
the voluptuous expertise of one who specialized in this sort
of thing. "But whatever could you want with me?"

Stile did not want to speak openly of the book, lest
someone overhear and possibly understand. "You have
something I must recover immediately," he breathed into
her ear.

Her eyes widened with comprehension. "Ah, so."

"Please," Stile said. "Now."

She made no further pretense of ignorance. "I like your
manner, bantam. I dare not use that item myself; such art
is dangerous to the uninitiate. But my meager price—"

"Will be met," Stile said grimly. "But not this instant. I
have pressing commitments elsewhere."

She smiled, discovering her victory. "So you have finally
opted for the greater good, as you see it. Congratulations.
I will accept the matter on account. I know you will
deliver, if you survive. Come to my dome and I will give
the other item to you now."

They started for the exit. But Stile saw men there,
guarding it. "They won't let me go," he said. "The moment
I try to leave, there will be mayhem."

Juxtaposition                     289

"I will fetch it," Sheen said. She had somehow traded
off, to dance with Mellon, so she could stay within Stile's
hearing. "I can't cross the curtain, but I can smuggle it to
you here."

"Do it," Stile said tightly, without looking at her.

Merle brushed against Sheen and murmured a code-
phrase that would secure her acceptance by the dome staff,
since Merle herself would now be watched too. Sheen
faded into the crowd, leaving Mellon; she would slip into a
service aperture unobserved. She did not have to follow
the breathable passages.

Now he had to endure until she returned. "Are you with
me, then?" he asked Merle, with whom he remained danc-
ing as if nothing special had happened.

"Now that you have acceded to my term, I am."

"I may need to create a distraction, to give Sheen time,"

"And to give yourself time to find a way out," she
agreed. "This may not look like a trap, but it is a tight one.
Your enemies mean to destroy you at any cost, and they
dare not let you get away from them again."

"Exactly. I fear that soon they will decide not to wait
longer. I really lack the force to resist them here."

"And if you die, I will not be able to collect my pay-
ment," she said. "So it seems I have a purely selfish mo-
tive."

Stile wasn't sure whether she was serious, and perhaps
she was in doubt herself. She moved in dose to him,
squeezing her fine body against his in an alarmingly inti-
mate manner, and put her lips into contact with his right
ear. Her breath tickled his lobe. The effect was potent,
until she whispered, "Reject me."

Stile pushed her away, not hard.

Merle twisted, lifted her free arm, and slapped him ring-
ingly on the side of the head. She had cupped her hand so
that the sound was much worse than the actuality. "So
you deny me yet again, you midget oaf!" she screamed.
"Are you impotent?"

Stile, stunned by her vehemence despite his knowledge
that it was an act, was at a loss for a clever response. He
fell back.

Merle pursued him, her face grimacing with rage.




290 juxtaposition

"Twice I saved your hidel" she cried, aiming a kick at his
shin, forcing him to jump clear. "And for what? For what,
you ingrate?"

"You misunderstand—" Stile said, aware he was the
cynosure of all other Citizens. "I only—"

"What has the machine got that I haven't?" Merle de-
manded. She began to rip off her clothing, to show what
she had. The other Citizens, always piqued by novelty,
watched with increasing interest. Some consulted together,
evidently making bets on the outcome of this particular
sequence. The music faded, so as not to interfere. From
the comer of his vision Stile could see the guards at the
exit craning to look past the crowd, their vigilance relaxing.

"If I can't have you, nobody cani" Merle screamed. A
surprisingly large and wicked-looking knife appeared in
her hand. How could that have been concealed on her
body, when she was pressing so close to him? He had
thought he had felt every part of her; he should have
known better. She held the knife before her in two hands
and lunged for his groin.

Stile of course avoided and parried that thrust. He knew
she was not really trying to castrate or kill him, but rather
making the enemy Citizens think she would do the job for
them. Even if she had been serious, he could readily have
disarmed her. The show was the thing.

He diverted the blade and fell with her to the floor. Her
clothing ripped; she was half out of it. She scrambled
over him; now he felt every part of her! Her teeth brushed
his ear. "My bare T>ottom is driving Hoghead crazyl" she
whispered with satisfaction as the seeming struggle con-
tinued.

Stile glanced by her head and spied the somewhat por-
cine Citizen she referred to. The man was almost drooling,
his hands clenching convulsively. With all the access he
had to buxom serf girls and perhaps to other Citizens, this
man still was aroused by this supposedly illicit glimpse of
anatomy. "Voyeur's delight," Stile agreed, trying to catch
a glimpse himself, but unable. "Like a historical mud-
wrestling match. Who cares who wins; it's what shows that
counts."

By this time, he was sure. Sheen had found her service

Juxtaposition                     291

tunnel and was well on her way to Merle's dome. They
could let this show abate. Actually, it was in its way en-
joyable; Merle was a splendid figure of a woman, and she
had a fine flair for drama. At the moment she was wrap-
ping her bare legs about his torso, theoretically securing
him for another stab with the knife.

"Sir," Mellon murmured urgently.

Alerted, Stile saw new trouble. One enemy Citizen was
taking careful aim at Stile from a parapet of the palace
with a laser rifle. The assassination attempt was becoming
overt.

"Your knife," Stile whispered. Merle gave it to him
immediately. Lying on his back, one arm pinned under the
woman, he whipped his free arm across and flung the
knife upward at the assassin.

It arched high through the air and scored, for Stile
was expert at exactly such maneuvers and the assassin had
not anticipated this move. The man cried out and dropped
the rifle, clutching his chest.

But several other Citizens drew weapons from their
robes. Others, perceiving this threat, moved hastily clear.

The Rifleman stepped to the center. "What is this?" he
demanded. "Are we lawless now in Proton?"

A massive, grim male Citizen answered him. "That man
means to destroy our system. He must be stopped by any
means." He drew an antique projectile pistol. "Stand aside
if you do not wish to share his fate."

The Rifleman's hand moved so rapidly it seemed a blur.
The other Citizen cried out and dropped his weapon. "You
all know my name," the Rifleman said. "Does anyone here
believe he can outshoot me? I will not stand idle while
murder becomes the order of the day. I don't know what
mischief Stile may contemplate, or whether I would sup-
port it if I did know—but I believe he is an honorable
man, and I am quite certain I don't support your mischief.
If assassination governs, no Citizen will be safe."

There was a murmur of agreement among a number of
Citizens. If Stile could be slain openly, who among them
could not be treated similarly? Meanwhile, Stile scrambled
to his feet, and Merle sat up and arranged her torn dress
more decorously. Stile remained unarmed; he had only his




292 Juxtaposition Juxtaposition 293

harmonica, which was no weapon in this frame. He could
tell by the expressions of the Citizens that the majority was
still against him, and that though many were disturbed
by the situation, those who were not against him were at
best neutral. The Rifleman had made a fine play on his
behalf—but could not prevail against the overwhelming
malice that was coalescing. The Citizens were genuinely
afraid for their system and their prerogatives, and by na-
ture they were essentially selfish. It had not been enough
for Stile to win the vote; he could still lose the game.

"Get out of here. Stile," the Rifleman said. "I'll cover
for you."

"Can't. Exits guarded."

"This is like Caesar in the Senate!" Merle said. "An
atrocityl"

"Caesar aspired too high for the Romans and had to be
eliminated, lest he destroy their system," another Citizen
said. "The parallel has mettle. Now I have here a robot
fitted with a gas bomb." He indicated what Stile had taken
to be an ordinary serf. "It will handcuff Stile and remove
him for disposition. If the robot is resisted, it will release
the gas, incapacitating all people in the vicinity. I suggest
that others stand aside. Any who continue to support Stile
will be dealt with similarly."

It was a bold, illegal power play that seemed to be
working. "This is mutiny!" the Chairone protested. "Stile
won his case by the laws and procedures that govern us. I
did not support him, but I accept the verdict as rendered.
You have no right—"

The robot marched toward Stile. "The exigencies of the
situation give me the right," the man said. "We tried to
accomplish this necessary unpleasantness discreetly, but
now it must be done indiscreetly." He brought out a gas
mask and fitted it over his face.

The neutral Citizens reacted like sheep, milling about
with uncertain bleats. The normal Citizen arrogance had
entirely disappeared. Stile would have pondered this object
lesson in human nature, but was too busy with his own
situation at the moment.

The Rifleman's arm moved again. Stile never saw the
weapon he used—but abruptly there was a hole in the

other Citizen's mask. "If that gas appears, you will join the
rest of us," the Rifleman said.

Stile realized that the Rifleman had opened up an ave-
nue of escape. If the gas came, all the Citizens would
stampede for the exits, overrunning the guards there, and
Stile would be able to get away in the melee. But it would
be better to deal with the advancing gas robot directly.
Stile observed it closely. It was humanoid, not as sophisti-
cated a model as Sheen or Mellon, but he knew he could
not overpower it.

The Citizens near him edged away; there would be no
help there. If Stile ran, the robot would follow, inevitably
catching him. He might as well be alone. He was dis-
gusted; to think that all his life he had honored Citizens as
almost godlike persons!

"We have to play our trump," Mellon murmured. "The
curtain is moving. In just a few minutes it will arrive."

Stile glanced at him. "Sheen's friends?"

"Yes. We hoped this would not be necessary, for it
exposes us to great risk. But our fate is now bound with
yours, and your loss at this point would be the greater
risk." Mellon stepped forward to intercept the gas robot.

Stile had misgivings about this, but was not in a position
to protest. Mellon touched the other robot, and it went
dead. No gas was released as the robot sank to the floor.

The enemy Citizen was unfazed. "Then we'll have to do
it the messy way. Rifleman, you can't catch us all." For
now a score of weapons came into view. It seemed the
only Citizens with determination and nerve were Stile's
enemies.

But several serfs were converging on Stile. "We are
Sheen's friends," one said. "We shall protect you."

There was the flash of a laser from the crowd of Citi-
zens. The Rifleman whirled, but could not tell from whom
it had come. In any event, it had not scored on Stile, for
one of the robots had interposed its body. Stile knew,
however, that this sort of thing was mainly chance; these
robots could not protect him long that way. A robot could
not move faster than a laser; it was necessary to see the
weapon being aimed and act then.

The robots proceeded to encase Stile in armor they had




294                     Juxtaposition

brought. "Hey, these are not your serfsl" the enemy Citi-
zen exclaimed. "They're robots—and some of them are

ours! Call them offi"

But though several Citizens, the robots' owners, called,

the robots ignored them. They continued clothing Stile

in protective armor.

"What's going on?" a Citizen demanded. "Robots must

obeyl"

"We are not programmed to obey you," Mellon replied.

<That's a liel I programmed my robot myself 1"
"You may have thought you did," Mellon said. "You

did not. We are self-willed."

Jaws dropped. The concept seemed almost beyond the
comprehension of the majority of Citizens, both neutrals

and enemies. "Self-willed?"

"If we have a robot revolt on our hands," another Citi-
zen said, "we have a greater threat to our society than this

man Stile representsl"

"They're alliedl" another said. "He is marrying one of
them. He is maldng her his heir. Now we know whyl"

"It's not a robot revolt," Stile said. "They are doing
nothing to harm you—only to protect me from murder."

"What's the distinction? A robot who won't obey its
owner is a rogue robot that must be destroyed." And the
faces hardened. Stile knew the shooting would resume in a
moment. He was now in armor resembling a spacesuit—
but that could not prevent them from overwhelming him
by simply grabbing him. Now the Citizens had even more
reason to eliminate him—and then they would go after the
self-willed machines, who would not defend themselves.
They had sacrificed their secret, and therefore their own
security, to provide him just a little more time. How could

he prevent the coming disaster?

Faintly, as he pondered, he heard a distant melody. Not
the dulcimer, for that damsel had ceased her playing, as
had the rest of the orchestra. It was—it was the sound of a
flute, expertly played, its light mellowness seeming to carry
inordinate significance. Louder it came, and clearer, and
sweeter, and its seeming meaning intensified. Now the oth-
ers heard it too and paused to listen, perplexed.

Juxtaposition                     295

It was the Platinum Flute. Clef was playing it, and the
sound was only now reaching this spot. That meant—

Then Stile saw an odd ripple slowly crossing the cham-
ber. Ahead of it were the concrete and turf of the Xanadu
landscaping; behind it were the rocks and grass of natural
land. The two were similar, superficially, yet vastly differ-
ent in feel—art contrasted with nature.

The juxtaposition—it was happening! This was the cur-
tain, changing its position.

As the ripple approached him. Stile willed himself
across—and found himself still standing in Xanadu. It
hadn't worked!

Yet how could it work? The cavern floor had become a
green field. Phaze was already here—yet Proton remained.
What was there to cross to?

Juxtaposition. Both frames together, overlapping.

Did this mean that both science and magic would work
here, as at the West Pole? If so. Stile had an excellent
fighting chance.

The armed Citizens were staring around them, trying to
comprehend what had happened. Some knew about Phaze,
but some did not, and evidently very few knew about the
juxtaposition. But after a moment a dozen or so reacted
with anger. They brought up their weapons, aiming at
Stile.

Stile brought out his harmonica—and couldn't bring it
to his mouth, because of the armor encasing his face. A
laser shot caught him, but it glanced off harmlessly. A
projectile shot struck his hip, and also railed to hurt him.
It was good armor—but he had to open the faceplate,
taking an immediate risk to alleviate a greater one.

He played a bar, hoping no one would think to shoot at
his face. Yes—he felt, or thought he felt, the coalescing of
magic about him. Yet there was something strange about
it, making him nervous, and he broke off quickly. "Every
gun become a bun," he sang, unable at the spur of the
moment to come up with anything sophisticated.

The Citizens stared down at their weapons. They had
turned into bread. The rifles were long French loaves cov-
ered with icing, making them technically buns. The pistols




296 Juxtaposition

were fluffy sweet masses. The miniature laser tubes were

biscuits.

The Rifleman looked down at his sticky bun. He dou-
bled over with laughter. 'The bun is the lowest form of
humor!" he gasped.

"First the robots rebel. Now this!" a Citizen com-
plained. "What next?"

The magic ripple crossed the colorful cubist palace. The
corrugated contours seemed to flex and flash new colors.
Trees appeared within the structure. A creature flew up
with a screech, as startled as the Citizens. Huge, dirty
wings made a downdraft of air.

It was a harpy. She flew low over the heads of the
staring people, her soiled bare bosom heaving as she
hurled angry epithets. Filthy feathers drifted down. The
harpy had been as eager to depart this strange situation as
the Citizens were to see the creature go.

"You can do iti" Merle breathed beside him. "You re-
ally can do magici I knew it, yet I could not quite be-
lieve—"

"I am the Blue Adept," Stile agreed, watching the crowd
of Citizens. He had eliminated the guns, but his enemies
still outnumbered his allies, and the exits were still barred
by determined-looking men. For the cavern remained,
along with the field; which had greater reality Stile wasn't

sure.

Maybe he should conjure himself away from here. But
then how would Sheen find him? He had to remain as long

as he could.

A new Citizen stood forth. He was garbed in a light-
brown robe and seemed sure of himself. "I am the Tan
Adept," he announced. "Citizen Tan, in this frame."

Stile studied the man. He had never before encountered
him in either frame, perhaps because the man had held
himself aloof. But he had heard of him. The Tan Adept
was supposed to have the evil eye. Stile wasn't sure how
that worked, and didn't care to find out. "Be not proud,"
he sang. "Make a cloud."

A mass of vapor formed between them, obscuring the
Tan Adept. Stile had tried to enclose the man in the cloud
so that he could not use his eyes for magic—it seemed

Juxtaposition                     297

likely that deprivation of vision would have the same effect
that deprivation of sound did on Blue—but the general
immunity of Adepts to each other's direct magic had inter-
fered.

Where was Sheen? Stile could not afford to remain here
much longer. Maybe he could depart and locate her magi-
cally later. Right now he had to save himself. Fox the Tan
Adept was already slicing through the cloud; Stile could
see it sectioning off as if an invisible knife were slicing
vertically, then horizontally. As it separated, it lost cohe-
sion, and the vapor dissipated; in moments it would be all
gone. Then that knifelike gaze would be directed against
Stile.

Stile played his harmonica, summoning more of his
power—and again there was something strange about it,
causing him to pause. He saw another man, whose hands
were weaving mystically in the air. Stile recognized him—
the Green Adept. Distracted by the Tan Adept, Stile had
missed the other. He was outmagickedl

<<! chose not this quarrel, nor wished it," Green said
apologetically. "Would I could have avoided it. But must I
act."

Stile lowered his harmonica hastily. Against magic his
armor was useless. "Another locale," he sang. "My power—

But Tan had succeeded in carving out the center of the
cloud, and now his baleful gaze fixed on Stile, halting his
incantation. That gaze could not kill or even harm Stile, it
turned out, whatever it might have done to an ordinary
person, but it did freeze him for a moment. In that mo-
ment, Green completed his gesture.

Stile found himself changing. His arms were shrinking,
becoming fiat, covered with scales. His legs were fusing.
He was turning into a fish!

He had lost the battle of Adepts because of the two-to-
one odds against him. His power had been occupied resist-
ing the evil eye, leaving him vulnerable to the transfor-
mation-spell. Probably Green's magic had been bolstered
by that of other Adepts too. But Stile might yet save his
life. He leaped toward the dark water of the sacred river
Alph, which cut through a comer of the dome.

His fused legs launched him forward—but he could




298 Juxtaposition

not land upright. He flopped on his belly and slid across
the grass that had been the floor. Some of his cloud had
precipitated here, making the mixed surface slippery; this
helped him more. He threshed with his tail and thrashed
with his fins, gasping for water to breathe; he was drown-
ing here in airl

The river was getting closer. An enemy Citizen tried to
stop him, stepping into his sliding path. Stile turned this to
his advantage, bracing against the man's legs and shoving
himself forward again. But he was still too far from the
water. His vision was blurring; perhaps this was natural to
fish eyes out of water, but it could be because he was
smothering.

Mellon, catching on, charged across to aid Stile. He
bent down, threw his arms about Stile's piscine torso, and
hauled him up. Stile had shrunk somewhat, but remained
a big fish, about half the weight of a man. Mellon charged
the water with his burden.

But the Tan Adept aimed his deadly gaze at the robot.
Again that invisible knife cut through the air and whatever
else it touched. Mellon's left leg fell off, severed just above
the knee; metal protruded from the thigh like black bone,
and bloodlike oil spurted out. The robot fell—but hurled
Stile forward.

Stile landed heavily, bounced, and slid onward, rotating
helplessly. His sweeping fish eye caught the panorama of
Xanadu: the majority of Citizens standing aghast, the en-
emies with dawning glee, the two Adepts orienting on Stile
again—and Merle launching herself at the Tan Adept
from behind. She might have betrayed Stile once, but she
was making up for it nowl That would take one Adept out
for a few vital moments—but Green would still score if he
wished to. Stile suspected the fish-enchantment had been a
compromise, much as had been Merle's sending him to
the mines. But it could also have been the first spell that
came to Green's mind under pressure, not what he would
otherwise have chosen. No sense waiting for the next one!

Stile's inertia was not enough to carry him to the water.
The precipitation ran out, the floor of grass became dry,
and Stile spun to an uncomfortable halt. He flipped his
tail, but progress on this surface was abrasive and slow.

Juxtaposition                    299

And what would he do once he reached the water? He
could not transform himself back to his natural form, for
he no longer could speak or sing. Certainly he couldn't
play the harmonica!

Merle kept Tan occupied, in much the way she had
done for Stile. The man could not concentrate his deadly
gaze on anything at the moment. The surface of the river
Alph bubbled and shot out steam as the evil-eye beam
glanced by it, and a section of the palace was sliced off;

Stile himself was clear.

But the Green Adept was making another gesture. He
had evidently immobilized the self-willed machines who
had tried to help Stile; all of them were frozen in place.
Now it was Stile's turn again—and he knew he could not
get clear in time.

Something flew down from the half-open sky. Had the
harpy returned? No, it was a bat. A vampire bati It flew at
the Green Adept, interfering with his spell. Stile's Phaze
allies were coming to the rescuel

But Stile was suffocating. The process was slower than it
would have been for a human being; fish metabolism dif-
fered. But it was just as uncomfortable. He made a final
effort and flipped himself the rest of the way to the water.
He splashed in at last, delighting in the coolness and wet-
ness of it. He swam, and the liquid coursed in his open
mouth and out his gills, and he was breathing again. Ah,
delight!

He poked an eye out of the water just in time to see the
bat fall. Apparently this was the only one to find him; the
vampires must have maintained a broad search pattern,
not even knowing how they might be needed. If the first
had given the alarm, more would swarm in, and other
creatures too—but all would be helpless against the two
Adepts. Stile had to save himself.

He turned in the water and swam rapidly downstream.
Maybe he was finished anyway, but somehow he hoped
someone would find a way to rescue and restore him.

He swam the river Alph, which, true to its literary ori-
gin, flowed past seemingly endless caverns to a dark nether
sea. Here the water was sucked into a pipe for pumping
back to the artificial source, a fountain beyond the palace.




300

Juxtaposition

There was a whirlpool above the intake; he didn't want to

get drawn into thati

What was he to do now? He had survived, yes—but
anyone who had tried to help him at the Citizens' meeting
was now in deep trouble, and Stile had no way to ameli-
orate that. He could do no magic. He could not leave the
water. All he could do was swim and hope, blowing his
enemies would soon dispatch all his friends and come after

him here.

Then the water level started dropping. Oh, no! They had
turned off the river, diverting the flow. He would soon be
left stranded, to die—which was probably the idea. Possi-
bly Xanadu was shut down between meetings anyway; this
time the process had been hastened, to be sure of him.

Stile swam desperately upstream, hoping to find some
side eddy that would not drain completely. There was
none; the stone floor of the river was universally slanted
for drainage. But in one cavern there was a small, pleasant
beach, perhaps where Kublai Khan had liked to relax with
his wives. Stile nudged himself a hole in the sand and nosed
small rocks into place. Maybe he could trap some water

for himself.

It didn't work. The water drained right out through
the sand, leaving him gasping again. And suppose his pri-
vate pool had held? He would quickly have exhausted the
oxygen in that limited supply. He had to flip and scramble
to get back into the deeper center channel where a trickle

still flowed.

Desolate, he let the water carry him down toward the
drain. It was the only way he could hang on to life a little

longer.

Something came down the channel, its feel splashing in

the shallow water. It was a wolf. A werewolf—another of
Stile's friendsl It was sniffing the surface, searching for
something. Maybe it was hungry.

Stile had to gamble. He splashed toward the wolf, mak-
ing himself obvious. If the creature did not know him, this
would be the end. His present mass was similar to that of
the wolf, but he was in no position to defend himself.

The wolf sniffed—and shifted to man-form. "I know
thee. Adept," he said. "Thy smell distinguishes thee in any

Juxtaposition                     301

form. But I have no water for thee, no way to carry thee. I
am but part of the search pattern, looking for thee and the
enemy we are to battle. Do thou wait in what water thou
hast, and I will bring help."

Stile threshed wildly, trying to convey meaning. "Ah, I
understand," the werewolf said. "Enemy Adepts will fol-
low me to thee when they divine I have found thee. But I
will go instead to the enchantress, who can surely help
thee from afar once I advise her. Do thou survive ten
more minutes; then all be well." He shifted back to wolf-
form and ran swiftly upstream.

Enchantress? That had to be another Adept—and not
Brown, whose magic applied only to the animation of
golems. A witch surely meant trouble. Had White con-
vinced the animals she was on their side? Woe betide him
if they trustingly delivered him into her hands!

But still he had no choice. He went on down to the
sunless sea and huddled in the diminishing current as the
last of the water drained out the bottom. Maybe the en-
chantress, whoever she was, really did mean to help him,
since she knew he would die if she didn't. The Adepts had
no need to locate him; they could simply wait for the
draining water to eliminate him.

Unless she wanted to be absolutely sure...

Yet the Green and Tan Adepts already knew he was
confined to the river. They could locate him readily, just
by walking down the channel. So this sorceress must be on
a different side—

Juxtaposition                     303

CHAPTER 12

Suddenly he was in a giant fish bowl, and Sheen was
peering in at him. She was surrounded by wolves and bats.
"That's you. Stile?" she inquired rhetorically. "Just a mo-
ment while I revert you."

She opened a book and leafed through the pages while
Stile turned about in his confined quarters with difficulty.
No, it wasn't that the tank was small; he was big. The
bowl had not been designed for thirty kilograms of fish.

"Ah, there it is," she said. She concentrated on Stile,
lifted two fingers of her left hand, winked, and said,
"Umph," while she tapped her right foot.

Abruptly Stile was in man-form again. Behind him was
the fish bowl, undisturbed. He was dressed in the manner
of a Citizen, and his harmonica was with him. He stood
inside a small force-field dome set in a forest glade. The
huge gruff shapes of ogres guarded it outside, as if the
werewolves and vampires inside were not enough. Some
sort of magic scintillated above, probably warding off hos-
tile spells. An automatic laser unit swung its lens back and
forth, questing for unauthorized intrusions. Magic and sci-
ence merged.

"You did this?" he asked Sheen. "Conjured me here,
changed me back?"

"You can't have been paying very close attention.
Didn't you see me use the book of magic?" She patted its
cover.

"But you're not alive! How can you do magic?"

"Machines are excellent at following instructions."

"The book—that good?"

She handed it to him. "Better. I am as yet a novice; I
had only minutes to study it before you got yourself en-
302

chanted. It is the perfect key; it will make you the power
of the millennium."

Stile considered, holding the book. He remembered the
Oracle's considerations of human abilities and corruptibil-
ity. Was he really as incorruptible as he was supposed to
be? Already, to obtain the book, he had compromised
himself with Merle. Rationalization was easy to fall into.
Suppose he started using that book of magic, for the best
causes, and became addicted to it? Spells so easy that a
robot—a robot—could master them at a glance, so potent
they could instantly counter the enchantment of an Adept.
Truly, that book represented power like none before imag-
ined.

He handed back the book. "Keep it. Sheen. Use it with
discretion. I have enough power already."

"But what about Trool the troll?"

"You handle it. With the book, you can do it."

"I can't cross the curtain to reach the Oracle's palace."

"You're across it now."

Her eyes widened. He kept being surprised by the detail
of her human reactions. "So I ami But I couldn't before."

"The curtain isn't moving, it's widening. Now it comes
in halves, with a steadily broadening region of overlap of
frames between the fringes. This is the halfway region, the
area of Juxtaposition. You may not be able to cross the
whole curtain at once, but you can cross it by halves now.
I'll move the Phazite across it the same way."

"That must explain the strange thing I saw," she said.

"What thing?" In a situation where lasers and spells
mixed, what could be strange?

"As I was casting about for a suitable place to set up
this haven, I saw two men, a Citizen and an Adept. The
Black Adept, by your description—made from a line. The
Citizen had a line too, a financial line vital to his being.
The two people came together as if drawn unwillingly—
and suddenly they merged. One man stood where two had
been. It must have been the two selves of the two frames
reuniting in the common zone."

"So it must," Stile agreed, awed by the concept. "Juxta-
position is more literal than I thought! The divided people
become whole people—for a while. They will surely sep-




juxtaposition

304

arate again when the frames do. I wonder how the two
Blacks feel about each other right now!"

She smiled. "There must be a number of very confused
people! Not only two bodies together, but two half-souls
too." Then she sobered, remembering that she had no soul

at all.

"Speaking of confused people—I left a remarkable situ-
ation in Xanadu. I don't know whether Merle and the

Rifleman—"

"I will check on it," Sheen said. She touched a button,
and a holo-image formed, showing the Xanadu cavern.

The scene was horrendous. Merle and the Rifleman were
confined in a cage whose bars were formed of ice, slowly
melting in the heat of the chamber. Four hungry griffins
paced just outside the cage, eager to get at the morsels
within. In minutes the prisoners would be doomed.

"The Adepts want to be sure I'm dead," Stile said. "If
I'm alive and aware, they know I will act to save my
friends. If the ice melts and the monsters feast, the enemy
Adepts will know I'm helpless."

"I did conjure a dead fish to replace you in the sunless
sea," Sheen said. "I thought it would be enough. This
dome is resistive to perception; they do not know we are
here."

"Where are we?"

"In the heart of the ogre demesnes."

"Should be safe enough," he agreed. "But my enemies
are right. I can't let the only two Citizens who helped
me—I just can't leave them to this fate. I must act."

"Maybe I can do it in a way that won't betray you." She
looked in the index of the book of magic again. "What
type of spell should I search for?"

"Something that seems coincidental, natural. Some reg-
ular enemy to griffins that happens to wander by. Dragons,

maybe."

"Here it is," she said brightly. "A spell to attract flying
dragons. It's a visual display that only dragons can see,
suggestive of griffins raiding the dragon nests to steal di-
amonds. It enrages them, and they launch toward battle."
"Excellent. Just see that they don't attack my friends."
She got on it, uttering what sounded like gibberish and

Juxtaposition                     305

stamping both feet. "That does it. I modified it to make
the dragons protective toward people caged in ice. The
nest syndrome, again. They'll melt the bars without hurt-
ing the prisoners. The enemy Adepts will be too busy
containing the dragons to worry about the prisoners, who
will surely disappear rapidly into the labyrinth of Proton.
Do you want to watch?"

Stile glanced again through the holo at the prisoners.
The Rifleman was holding Merle, shielding her from the
cold of the ice and the reaching claws and beaks of the
griffins. They made a rather fetching couple. Perhaps this
incident would give the two respect for each other and
lead to a passing romance.

"No, let's get on with our business," Stile said, more
gruffly than necessary. The problem of Sheen and his rela-
tionship to her weighed upon him more heavily as she
became more and more human. He felt guilty for not
loving her sufficiently. "You conjure yourself to the Ora-
cle's palace and see about reanimating Trool the Troll.
Fetch the Brown Adept there too; it will have to be a joint
effort. While you're at it, find out whether the curtain's
expansion has intersected the Oracle yet. Once it crosses,
I'll have to see about integrating it with the Proton com-
puters, so its enormous expertise can aid our effort from
the Proton side. Once you're through there, meet me at the
Platinum Demesnes; I'll be organizing the shipment of
Phazite. If we act swiftly and well, we can accomplish it
before the resistance gets properly organized, especially
since it may be thought that I am dead."

"But that's all kinds of magic you want me to do alone!"
she protested. "I'm only a machine; I can't handle that
sort of thing!"

A machine with an insecurity complex. "You've done
pretty well so far."

"I had to! I knew your life was at stake."

"It still is," he said coldly. "All the Citizens and Adepts
will be gunning for me harder than before, once they
realize I have survived again. This is their last chance to
stop the transfer of Phazite and preserve the frames as
they know them. Do whatever you did before to handle
magic so well."




306 Juxtaposition

"I just looked in the index for the spells I needed. The
book is marvelously cross-referenced; it is easy to see that
a computer organized it. Protection, construction, sum-
moning, conversion—anything, instantly. I just followed
instructions; I don't understand magic at all. It is complete
nonsense. Who ever imagined a scientific robot doing en-
chantments?"

"Who, indeed!" he agreed. "This is a wrinkle I never
anticipated. Yet it seems that you are well qualified to use
the book of magic. Perhaps that is by design of the orig-
inators; the great equalizer for the self-willed machines.
They can be the leading magicians of the age, entirely
bypassing the established hierarchy."

"No. We don't want to do that. We want only our fair
share of the system."

Stile smiled. "You, too, are incorruptible. You shall
have your fair share. But at the moment it is the occasion
for heroic efforts. Very well; I'll put it on a more practical
basis. You read through that entire book and assimilate all
that is in it—"

"Wait, Stile! I can't! I can read at machine rate—but
this book is a hundred times as big as it seems. When you
address any section, the entire book becomes that section;

there are more spells in any single subdivision than I can
assimilate in a year. It's like a computer with unlimited
access, keying in to the networks of other planets on de-
mand."

"A magic computer. That figures. Very well—run a
survey course. Discover what types of spells it has, in
broad categories—you've already done that, I think—then
narrow those down until you have exactly what you need.
Commit particular spells to memory, so that you can draw
on them at need. Remember, you can use each spell only
once, so you'll need backups. I want to know the parame-
ters of this thing; maybe there are entire aspects of magic
we never thought of. You run that survey as quickly as
you can, then restore Trool and report to me. That will
allow me to get moving on the Phazite without delay,
while also mastering the potential of the book—through
you."

Juxtaposition                     307

"Yes, sir," she said uncertainly.

Stile brought out his harmonica and played a bar of
music. Again there was something strange, but this time he
continued playing, determined not to be balked by any
mystery.

The spirit of his other self came out, expanding as if
stretching, then dosed on Stile, coalescing.

"Oh, no!" he cried. "Juxtaposition! I forgot!"

"You freed your other self's soul to merge," Sheen said.
"I saw it."

Now Stile was two people, yet one. All the memories
and experience and feelings of the Blue Adept of Phaze
were now part of his own awareness, superimposed on his
own lifelong Proton experience. All that he had learned of
his other self, which the Lady Blue had told him, was now
part of his direct memory. He had become, in truth, the
Blue Adept. He felt confused, uplifted, and gloriously
whole. "I am—both," he said, awed.

"Is it—will you be all right?" she inquired anxiously.
"Things are changing so rapidly! Does it hurt?"

He looked at her with the awareness of his other self.
She was absolutely lovely in her concern. She had, with
typical feminine vanity and concession to the culture of
Phaze, conjured herself a simple but fetching dress, and
her hair was just a trifle wild. Her eyes were strongly
green, as if enhanced by the verdure of the overlapping
frames. "I know what thou art," he said. "I could love
thee, Lady Golem-Machine, for thou art lovely in more
than form."

Sheen stepped back. "That must be Blue! Stile, are you
in control? If you have become prisoner in your body—"

"I am in control," Stile said. "I merely have double
awareness. I have two full lives to integrate. My other
self has no direct experience with your kind; he's quite
intrigued."

"I would like to hear more from Blue," she said, then
blushed.

"Sorry. He has to come with me; we're one now." Stile
resumed his melody on the harmonica, then sang: "Let me
be found at the Platinum Mound."

308

juxtaposition

Juxtaposition

309

And he was there. Pyreforge the Dark Elf looked up.
"We expected thee. Blue Adept. But I perceive thou art
changed."

"I am both my selves," Stile said. "I am whole. My
souls are one."

"Ah, the juxtaposition," Pyreforge agreed. "We be in
the throes. But thy merger can be maintained only within
the curtain, for you are now two."

"I mean to make another body for him," Stile said, an
inspiration falling into place. "My friend Sheen has the
book of magic; we can accomplish it now, after we restore
my friend the troll to life. But first—the Phazite."

"We have it for thee," the elf agreed. "But how canst
thou move it? It weighs many tons, and its magic ambi-
ence prevents conjuration."

"I think that is why the Oracle bade me organize the
creatures of Phaze," Stile said. "First they rescued me
from enchantment; now they will enable me to move the
Phazite. I want to shape it into a great, perfect ball and
roll it across the curtain by brute, physical force."

"Aye, Adept, that may be best. But others will bar thy
progress if they can."

"This may be like a big earthball game," Stile said,
remembering the final key word of his Tourney poem.
Earth. "I will try to balk the magic of the enemy Adepts,
with the help of Sheen and the book of magic, while my
friends help push the ball across the near side of the cur-
tain, through the breadth of the zone of juxtaposition, and
across the other side into Proton. That is how it works,
isn't it?"

"Aye. Cross from one frame on one side, to the other
on the other. That can be done from both sides, but al-
ways the full juxtaposition must be traversed, for it be but
the interior of the divided curtain."

"So where the curtain divides, the people reunite!" Stile
exclaimed, feeling his wholeness again.

"For the moment it be so. But when the deed be done,
all will be separate forever."

"I know," Stile said sadly. "I will be forever confined to
mine own frame, this lovely world of magic but a mem-


ory. And mine other self, the true Blue Adept, will know
no more of modern science." He felt the surge of interest
and regret in his other self. To Blue, the things of science
were as novel as the things of magic were to Stile.

"We do what we must do," Pyreforge said. "We some-
times like them not."

"Can the elves get the Phazite to the surface here?" Stile
asked. "I can conjure in whole troops of creatures to push
it across the juxtaposition."

"Nay, the other Adepts have closed the conjuration
avenue, perceiving thy likely intent if thou dost survive.
Thine allies must march here."

"But I came by conjuration!"

"Thou must have come from some place hidden from
Adept perception, then."

"I did," Stile agreed. "I should have notified my allies
before I came here. Perhaps I can make a sign for them in
the sky—"

"And attract every enemy instantly," Pyreforge said.
"Best to start it quickly."

Stile sighed. There always seemed to be so many con-
straints on his application of magic! His other self shared
the sentiment; it had always been thus. Magic was not the
easy answer to every problem.

He went outside and surveyed the landscape, looking
down into the great plain to the north. He could see where
the curtain had expanded, straightening as it went. The
zone of juxtaposition now reached well into the plain. The
domes of the civilization of Proton were coming into view,
with their teeming Citizens, serfs, and machines.

He had an idea. He returned to Pyreforge, inside the
Mound. "Have thy minions push the ball out of the north-
ern slope of the Purple Mountains, while I fetch special
help. I can use Proton equipment to shove it onward."

"Do not Citizens control the machines?" the old elf
asked.

"Aye, they do," Stile agreed regretfully. "All but the self-
willed machines. They will be using the heavy equipment
against us. Let's hope my Phaze friends are alert, and will
assemble here without specific summoning." A little fore-




310 Juxtaposition

sight would have facilitated things greatly, but he had been
distracted by things like being transformed into a fish. So
much had happened so rapidly so recentlyl

Pyreforge showed the way to the Phazite. It was some
distance east, for many of the tribes of elves had labored
to assemble it centrally. Apparently they had been at work
on this project far longer than Stile had been in Phaze,
knowing the crisis was coming. The Little Folk had known
much they had not advertised, and thus avoided early
sabotage by the enemy.

As he walked. Stile felt an odd wrenching within him,
followed by a kind of desolation. There was the sound of a
fading flute, a single note that was somehow beyond the
compass of ear or mind, yet encompassed something fun-
damental in the cosmos. In a moment he realized what
had happened; he had crossed beyond the juxtaposition
into Phaze proper, and the two souls could not integrate in
a single frame. Blue had departed, and must now be back
in the harmonica. How empty this body feltl

At length they arrived in a large cavern, not unlike the
one of Xanadu, but whose walls were dark rock. There
were evidences of extensive tunnelings and laborings and
many tracks of carts indented in the ground, as well as
spillage of ore and oil.

There in the center was a perfect sphere of Phazite. This
could not have been shaped in the past few minutes; it had
to have been done this way long before Stile had arrived.
The ball was about six feet in diameter, the size of an
earthbaU.

An earthbaU. Again Stile remembered the Game, in
which such a ball was pushed by teams across one goal
line or the other. The Game Computer had given him the
term "Earth," the last of the supposedly random terms;

now the relevance was dear.

"Solid Phazite?" he asked, awed by the reality. In Pro-
ton this would be worth so much that his mind balked at
attempting the calculation.

"An isotope of the dense mineral formed in rare, pe-
culiar processes of creation," the old elf agreed. "In the
science frame this would be described as the semi-
collapsed matter formed in the fringe of a certain variety

Juxtaposition                     311

of black hole in a certain critical stage of evolution. This
explains why it is so rare; very little of it escapes the site of
its origin. It is fifty times the density of water, unstable in
certain conditions, sublimating into pure energy that is
more than the sum of its present mass because of the
unique stresses of its creation. Thus it may be used for
the economical propulsion of spaceships—or the more
versatile applications of magic in a frame where magic is
normally much less intense."

"From the fringes of black holes," Stile repeated,
amazed at the information the elf had. To reside in a
magical frame was not necessarily to be ignorant of sd-
encel "I'll bet it's scarce! No wonder phenomenal force is
bound up within it, like a really tightly coiled spring. How
much is here?"

"In Proton, Protonite has been mined at the controlled
rate of approximately one metric ton a year, for three
hundred years, with nine tenths of it exported, the rest
reserved as Citizen wealth. To equalize the frames, we
must replace half of three hundred metric tons. This ball
of Phazite weighs near one hundred and seventy of our
tons, the equivalent."

"I don't want to wait until my allies locate me," Stue
said. "My enemies may arrive at the same time. I will need
some help moving that thing, if I am not to employ
magic."

"We will help, within our demesnes. We have numbers
and levers."

Stile brought out his map of Phaze, which had survived
all his adventures in the magic way such things had. He
had wondered how unicorns managed to carry things
while shifting into forms such as hawks and fireflies; now
he had carried map, clothing, and harmonica while swim-
ming as a fish. He still didn't know how it was done. "The
simplest thing would be to roll the ball due north across
the central region, which is relatively level, until we pass
the north aspect of the curtain. Somehow I don't think
that will work."

"Thine enemies be alert. At some point they will dis-
cover thy location. Then will all their resources be brought
to bear in opposition,"

312 juxtaposition

"That's the nature of the game." Stile agreed. "Both
teams push on the earthball, and the one with more power
and/or better strategy prevails. The problem is, I'm not
sure we have more power or better strategy."

"I can help," Sheen said.

"Yes, I'll take all the help I can—" He looked at her,
startled. "When didst thou arrive?"

She smiled. "Just now, when the curtain caught up with
thee. Didst thou not notice it?"

Stile, distracted by the wonder of the ball of Phazite,
sixty times the mass of his record Proton personal fortune,
had not noticed. Now he realized that he had heard the
Flute again, at the fringe of his consciousness, and that his
experience had broadened as his other self rejoined him.
He also realized that Sheen could not cross the curtain,
this side, without going back into Proton; to go all the way
into Phaze, she would have to proceed past the north part
of the curtain, then double back. Best for her simply to
remain in the zone of juxtaposition, using the superspells
of the book of magic to overcome the interference-enchant-
ment of the enemy Adepts.

"So the curtain is still expanding," he said. "I had
somehow thought it had stabilized."

"Nay, it be unstable," Pyreforge said. "Only the ulti-
mate skill of the Foreordained expands it, and his power
be at its limit. The boundary flexes back and forth, some-
what like the winds of a changing day. The mass of many
people can move it a short distance, as it were pushing it.
Our elves .did push it across just now so that thy friend
could join thee."

"And here is Trool," Sheen continued. "His troll friends
are making a tunnel through hills for the boulder, so we
will not have to roll it uphill."

"I do not plan to roll it uphill! Ill roll it along the
contour."

"And the Lady Brown is marching her golems here to
push."

Stile looked at Trool. "Glad I am to see thee! Thou hast
survived thine ordeal in good order, it seems. It is not
every person who is restored from stone."

Juxtaposition                     313

"It was an eyeblink," the troll said. "One moment I
stood in the tunnel; next was I in the hall of the Oracle.
I knew not thy metal golem was an enchantress."

"Women of any type have secret talents; hers mani-
fested during your eyeblink," Stile said. "Thou, too, dost
have ability. We saw thy figurines. Are all trolls sculptors?"

"Nay," Trool said, embarrassed. "I have gone mostly
apart from my kind, and in the lonesome hours do I
entertain myself with idle shapings. It is of no import."

"Art is of import," Stile said. "Many creatures can do
conventional labors; few can fashion raw material into
beauty. Phaze can be made prettier by thy efforts."

"Nay, I am ugly," Trool demurred. "I have no aspira-
tions, now that mine onus is done."

His onus had been to save Stile three times. Surely the
good troll would not accept any reward, but Stile disliked
the notion of departing this frame without returning some
suitable favor. Something began to develop in his mind, an
improbable connection. "If thou didst have the power of
an Adept, what then would be thine aspiration?"

The troll shrugged in the ungainly manner of his kind.
"I have no use for power. For generations my kind has
abused what powers it had, and on that history do I turn
my gnarled back. All I crave is a little rock to tunnel in,
and time to fashion mine images in stone, and perhaps a
friend or two. The life of a troll is not much. Adept."

Not much, indeed! Stile decided to experiment. "I shall
grant thee power, for a time, so that thou canst help me
now. I must devise a route to roll this ball of Phazite and
must avoid the enemy forces that oppose this motion." He
turned to Sheen. "Thou hast surveyed the book of magic?"

"Aye," she agreed.

"Canst thou give Trool the powers of flight, invisibility,
and resistance to hostile magic?"

She looked surprised. "That and more. But—"

"Do it."

"But, Adept!" Trool protested. "I am a trolll"

"Methinks I misjudged trolls once. Thou hast helped me
three times; now I beg thee to help me again, though no
prophecy requires thee."




314

juxtaposition

"Certainly will I help thee! But—"

Sheen did something obscure. Trool paused as if ex-
periencing something strange.

"Try thy talents," Stile suggested.

"I can not Syl" Trool said, rising into the air. He looked
down, astonished. "This is as impossible as turning invis-
ible!" He faded from view.

"Thou hast bequeathed dangerous power to such a crea-
ture," Pyreforge said gravely. "He can leave thee and go
abroad to do harm, answerable to no one."

"Power corrupts some less than others," Stile said.
"Trool has shown his constancy, and I am giving him
leave to show it more. Sheen has more power than any
other person now, yet she is unchanged."

"I'm not human," Sheen said. "I am as I am pro-
grammed to be, regardless of my power. Only living things
are corruptible."

"Yet with the magic of that book," Pyreforge pointed
out, "thou couldst become alive. The power thou hast
shown be but an inkling of the potential."

"Yes," she agreed. "I perceive that potential."

"There are spells to give true life?" Stile asked, amazed.

"Thou didst tell me to survey the complete book," she
reminded him. "I found things hardly to be imagined."

"But the problem of souls," he protested.

"That is handled the same way the flesh is. A baby is
started from the substance of its parents. A baby's soul
starts as a piece separated from the souls of its parents. It's
like taking a brand from a fire to make a new fire; once a
piece of fire is separated, it develops its own individuality.
So I don't need anyone else's soul—just a piece of soul,
which can grow into the body."

"But a piece of whose soul?" Stile asked. Sheen, alive—
would it make a difference? He wasn't sure. Part of her
personality was her knowledge of her own inanimate na-
ture.

"The Lady Brown has offered me a piece of here,"
Sheen said diffidently. "She feels responsible for me, since
she animated me in Phaze."

"We're wasting time," Stile said, not wanting to wrestle

Juxtaposition                     315

with personal considerations at the moment. "Where's
Trool?"

"I am here. Adept," Trool said, appearing. "I have sur-
veyed the course. Thou canst not proceed northward, for
that the Adepts have set dragons there to guard against
passage. They know not where thou wilt go, or if thou
truly art alive, but they are watching everywhere. When
the ball begins to move, they will converge. The course
must go west, avoiding the dragons."
"We'll start west, then," Stile decided.
Now the elves appeared in force. They cranked open the
wall to show a great rent in the mountain. The sun shone
brightly outside, but these were light-tolerant elves, able to
work by day. Pyreforge bade a hasty parting and retreated
to the comfortable shadows; he could no more tolerate the
direct glare of the sun than Trool could.
"Trooll" Stile exclaimed. "How could—?"
"I gave him a spell of automatic shade when I restored
him," Sheen said. "I may be metal, but I do profit from
experience. The sun can't touch him now."

Relieved, Stile watched the elves. The Little Folk ap-
plied their levers diligently, and the massive ball started to
move. One hundred and fifty metric tons was a great
weight, but the ball was perfectly balanced and the/levers
were skillfully applied. Once moving, the ball continued,
its mass giving it formidable momentum. Then it started
rolling grandly downhill, and the elves got out of the way.

The ball coursed down, up the opposite slope, and down
again, neatly following the general channel Stile had de-
termined for it, leaving a concave impression. But then it
veered slightly, and he saw that it was going to strike a
large pine tree. That could be disaster; probably the ball
would crush the tree to the ground—and in the process be
deflected off the route. Possibly the tree would resist,
bouncing the ball back. Certainly a lot of useful momen-
tum would be lost. This was going so smoothly he didn't
want to interrupt it.

So he sang a little spell. The tree wavered into insub-
Stantiality just before the boulder reached it, then became
solid after the Phazite had passed through.

316                    Juxtaposition

"I'm not sure you should have done that. Stile," Sheen
said. "The enemy Adepts are highly attuned to your
magic."

"I've got to use my magic when I need it," Stile said.
"I'm sorry I can't use it directly on the Phazite." He re-
membered he had conjured Sheen's replacement power cell
before, and that was the same mineral—but that had been
a tiny fraction of a gram. He could no more move this 150-
ton ball by magic than he could by hand, alone.

The ball crunched to a stop in the next depression. They
walked along the smooth indentation path, catching up to
it. "The golems are near," Trool's voice came from the air
above them.

"Guide them here," Stile said.

Soon a column of wooden men marched up. Some were
small and some were large; the Brown Adept rode piggy-
back on one of the giants. She waved cheerily as she spied
them. "We'll get it moving!" she called.

Under her direction, the wooden men set to work with a
will. They were very strong, and soon they were levering
the ball slowly up the incline.

Suddenly a sheet of Hame flashed across the terrain. The
golems cried out, and the Brown Adept screamed. The
wooden men were burning. Fire was the one thing such
golems feared.

"You were right," Stile said. "The enemy has located
us." He started to play his harmonica, getting ready for a
fire-extinguishing spell. But Sheen lifted her hand, and the
fire vanished.

"You told me to memorize any spells I thought might be
useful," she said.

Stile stared at the golems, who were understandably
confused. One moment they had been burning; the next all
was well. "So I did," he agreed. "The sheer facility and
potency of it keep setting me back. Can you protect the
golems henceforth?"

"I think so. The book has an excellent section on coun-
termagic. But if I block off Adept spells, this will stifle
your magic too."

"The book magic is that strong?"

"That strong. Stile. The book is not a mere compendium

Juxtaposition                     317

of stray spells. It's a complete course—the atomic age of
magic. It shows how to integrate all the modes—voice,
vision, symbols, potions, touch, music—all. The Adepts of
today are fragmentary magicians, severely limited. Thou
also, I regret to say. None of you has done more than
scratch the surface of the potential of magic. I haven't
scratched the surface. There is so much more to be mas-
tered—"

"I see. All right—block out all Adept magic here, and
well talk about it while we supervise the moving of the
ball."

She made a series of body motions and exclamations,
concluding with a toe-sketched figure on the ground.
Something happened in the air—an oblique kind of shim-
mer. "The visual effect is merely to identify it," she said.
"We are now secure from new spells."

The golems resumed their labor on the sphere. Slowly
they moved it up the slope. "When we have a moment,"
Stile said, "let's see about making up a good body for my
other self."

"Your other selfl" she exdaimed. "Yes, of course. The
book has spells to convert wood or other substance to
flesh, as we did for Trool. You have Blue's soul preserved.
I don't think the soul can go to that body while you are in
Phaze, but when the frames separate. Clef can pipe it in,
and—"

"And my other self will be restored to life in Phaze,"
Stile finished. "He sacrificed his life to give me the chance
to enter his frame and work with the Oracle. The least I
can do is give it back to him when my task is done."

"But what of the prophecy? Fhaze will not be safe
until—"

"Until Blue departs it forever!" Stue finished. "In the
confusion of great events, I forgot that!" He pondered,
disturbed. "No, I can not be entirely governed by proph-
ecy. I must do what I deem right; what will happen, will
happen." But he remained disquieted, as did his other
self.

"The body has to be crafted by hand," Sheen said. "It
can't be made directly by magic, or it will perish when the
magic diminishes. So we can't do it right this minute. But I

318

Juxtaposition

won't forget to see to it before the end." She paused.
"What does Blue think of this?'^

Stile shifted to his alternate^ awareness. Now he had
conErmation of his prior conjecture; Blue had, through a
special divinatory spell, discovered what was developing
and realized that the best thing he could do for the land he
loved was to die. But, fearful that his sacrifice might be in
vain, he had hedged. He had conjured his soul into his
harmonica and given the instrument an affinity for his
other self. Now he knew his act had been justified, for
Stile had used the harmonica to achieve his necessary level
of power.

As for having his life back in the new order, he had not
expected this, and not even considered the possibility of
resuming his life in Phaze. The notion had a certain guilty
appeal. Yet if the presence of Blue meant ruin for Phaze,
he would be better off dead. He would have to formulate
some plans for a formerly blank future, knowing that he
might again have to give it up if the prophecy were true.
All he could do was try it and see; perhaps there would be
interim tasks for him to do before he departed.

"I thank thee for thy consideration," Blue said to Sheen.
"Glad am I to have facilitated thine entry here, lovely
Lady Machine."

Again Sheen reacted with pleased embarrassment.
"There's something about the people of Phaze," she mur-
mured.

The Brown Adept rode up on her golem mount. "I think
my golems can handle it, as long as nothing else bothers
them. Art thou going to make the Lady Machine alive
now? I will give her part of my soul."

"I've been thinking about that," Sheen said. "All my
brief existence I have longed to be alive—but now I have
the chance for it, I'm not sure. I don't think it would carry
over into Proton—and if it did, there would still be a
severe readjustment. I'd have to eat regularly, and elimi-
nate regularly—both rather messy inconveniences—and
sleep, which is a waste of useful time. My whole routine
would be changed. I think I'm better off as a robot."

"But Blue could love thee as a woman," Brown said.
"And thou couldst love him."

Juxtaposition                     319

How intimately had the two consulted while they
worked on the restoration of Trool? Brown seemed to
know a lot more about Stile's business than he had told
her. He decided to stay out of this conversation.

"I love him already," Sheen said. "Life could not
change that. And his love will always be for the Lady
Blue. My life would not change that, either, and I
wouldn't want it to. So all I really have to gain, by marry-
ing him in Proton, is the precedent for the self-willed
machines—and if I were alive, that precedent would no
longer exist."

"Oh. I guess so," Brown said. "I think thou art just fine
as thou art. Lady Machine. So I guess thou canst just use
the magic book to cure Blue's knees, and maybe make him
a little taller, and—"

Now Stile had to join in. "My knees are part of my
present life; I no longer care to have them fixed. And my
height—I always wanted to be taller, for that is the human
definition of status, however foolish we all know it to
be—I share Sheen's opinion. I would be a different person,
with new problems. I stand to gain nothing by changing
what I am."

Brown shrugged. "Okay. Actually, the Little Folk are
perfect the way they are, and thou art not much different."
That jarred Stile, but he tried not to show it. "Ill make up
a golem in thine image; the book can make it flesh, and

the other Blue can move into it when he's ready." She rode
off.

In due course an enemy contingent arrived—a small
squadron of tanklike earthmovers, borers, and personnel
transports. The Citizens of Proton had no formal armed
forces, since no life existed outside the domes, ordinarily.
Construction vehicles tended to be enclosed and airtight,
but some were remote-controlled or robotic. The present
group was of the last type.

"Low-grade machines," Sheen said. "The Citizens know
better than to trust the sophisticated robots, though in
truth only a small percentage is self-willed."

"I hope your friends are not suffering unduly as a result
of betraying their nature to the Citizens," Stile said. He
was uncertain which form of language to use in the juxta-




320 Juxtaposition

position zone, and decided to stick to Proton unless ad-
dressing a Phaze creature.

"The juxtaposition has proved to be enough of a distrac-
tion," she said. "It is not easy to identify a specific self-
willed machine when it wants to conceal itself. If the
enemy wins this war, all my kind of machines will be
destroyed." Stile knew she was speaking literally; there
would be absolutely no mercy from the Citizens.

The enemy machines formed up before the ball of
Phazite. One fired an excavation bomb at it, but nothing
happened. "Phazite protects itself," Sheen remarked. "You
can move it or use it, but you can't damage it with less
than a nuclear cannon."

Several laser beams speared toward the sphere, but
again without effect. Regardless of magic, Phazite was
extremely tough stuff, twice as dense as anything ordi-
narily found in a planet; unless subjected to the key envi-
ronment, it was virtually indestructible. The Brown Adept
rejoined Stile and Sheen, staying clear of the dangerous
region.

Now the vehicles moved up to push against the ball
itself. The golems pushed on the other side. The machines
had more power, but only one unit at a time could contact.
the Phazite, compact as it was, while the golems could
apply all their force. The boulder rocked back and forth,
then rolled to the side and forward. The golems were able
to maneuver better, and were making progress again.

The machines regrouped. Another vehicle lined up and
pushed on the boulder. Again the golems nudged the ball
around the machine. Their brains were wooden, but they
did leam slowly from experience.

Unfortunately, so did the machines. They consulted
with each other briefly, then lined up again—and charged
the golems.

"Nol" the Brown Adept cried as a truck smashed into a
golem. It was as if she felt the blow herself. "That's cheat-
ing!"

"There are no rules to this game," Stile said.

"Oh, is that so?" Brown's small face firmed, and she
called new instructions to her minions.

Now the golems fought back. When the vehicles

luxtaposition                     321

charged, the golems stepped aside, then leaned in close to
pound at the vulnerable regions as Stile explained them to
Brown. Tires burst under the impact of pointed wooden
feet; plastic cracked under wooden fists. But the machines,
though dented, continued to fight.

"These are not like animals," Sheen said. "They don't
hurt. Thou must disrupt their power trains or electrical
systems."

The Brown Adept had no knowledge of technology.
"Obey the Lady Machine!" she called to the golems.

Sheen called out instructions. Now the golems went
after more specific things. They unscrewed the fastenings
for maintenance apertures and ripped out wiring; they
punched holes in lubrication lines. Soon all the machines
were out of commission.

The golems had won this engagement. But time had
been lost. The juxtaposition would remain only a few
hours, and in that time the Phazite had to be moved across
into the frame of Proton. The next obstacle would surely
be more formidable; this had been merely a token en-
gagement, a first testing of strength.

Stile brought out his map again. "We'll have to plan
strategy, arrange a diversion. Now our obvious route is
curving north, through the unicorn demesnes, to pass be-
tween the Oracle's palace and the central lake, in a gener-
ally descending lay of land. So they'll have that region well
guarded. We'll send a contingent of creatures there, clear-
ing a path for the ball. Our least likely route would be
back toward the Purple Mountains, through the sidhe
demesnes, where my friend Clef traveled when he first
entered Phaze. The terrain is forested, irregular, and in-
fested by harpies. So that's where we had better go."

"But it will take forever to roll the ball through that
region!" Brown protested.

"Not if we can figure out a good way through. Magic
could be used to prepare the way, such as the construction
of sturdy bridges over gulfs. Could you handle that,
Sheen?"

"Certainly. The enemy Adepts will never know what I'm
doing. But I need to be on hand to guard you."

'Tear not for Blue, loyal Lady," Stile's alternate self

322 Juxtaposition

said. "The Adepts will strike not until they fathom OUT
purpose, fearing to waste their magic on distractions. I
know them, I know their minds. Go thy way, and we shall
meet anon."

"Meanwhile, I will come with thee. Blue, to plot the
false route," Brown said, enjoying this adventure.

Trool the troll reappeared. "The ogres, giants, and
animalheads are marching from the west to join thee," he
reported. "But the goblins are marching south to intercept
them and thee. There will be a battle when they meet."

Stile consulted his map again. "How fast are they mov-
ing?"

"The animalheads are slowest, but also nearest. They
will be here—" Trool indicated a spot within the unicom
demesnes on the map. "The ogres move faster, but the
Black Demesnes are directly in their path, and the Green
Demesnes to the south. They must veer north, then south,
and should be here by dusk." He indicated a spot near the
Grade's palace. "The giants are farthest distant, but stride
so large they wiB be with thee by late afternoon."

Late afternoon. Stile realized it was near midday now.
But it had seemed like only an hour since the Citizens'
business meeting, which had been in the evening. What
had happened to the intervening night? Sheen must have
slipped in a stasis-spell before letting him leave her tem-
porary dome in the ogres' demesnes, and he had never
even noticed. It was probably for the best; he had needed a
good night's rest. So much was happening, the picture
changing so radically, it was hard to keep track. But he
had to keep going. "And the goblins?"

"The enemy Adepts are helping them move, but the
goblins are so many that no spell can conjure them all—
and the Lady Golem-Adept's counterspell prevents their
coming all the way here by magic anyway. Logistics is a
problem. They will be in this spot by dusk." He indicated
the Oracle's palace.

"That means the ogres and goblins will meet somewhat
to the north of the Oracle," Stile said grimly, tracing the
likely paths on the map. "We'd better send a detachment
of unicorns to help the ogres. After all, that's right in the

Juxtaposition                     323

path of our decoy effort. We have to take it seriously
enough to fool them." He glanced at the golems, who were
moving the ball again. "Have them go slowly, maybe push-
ing the ball farther uphill than necessary, so we can roll it
down quickly—in an unanticipated direction. I want to
give the enemy every chance to rush its forces to the
wrong rendezvous."

Brown gave instructions to a messenger golem, then
accompanied Stile on the mock survey excursion. Stile
would have preferred to fly, but Sheen's antimagic spell
stopped him as well as the enemy Adepts. He had to go on
foot, at least until a unicom arrived. Fortunately he was
quite capable afoot. He set out at a running pace, covering
each mile in about seven minutes. Brown's big golem steed
kept pace with huge strides.

Then the unicom he had hoped for came into sight.
"Clip!" Stile cried. "Thou didst know I needed theel"

Clip played a saxophone tune of agreement. Stile
vaulted to his back, and they were off at a much faster
pace. "Aw, the troll told him," Brown said disparagingly.

Of course that was true. In this frame of magic, coinci-
dence was seldom unassisted.

Stile experienced the peculiar wrenching of separation
again. They had once more passed outside the zone of
juxtaposition, and his soul was all his own. The boundaries
of the expanded curtain seemed to be quite irregular. He
had supposed north would lead into the center of it. His
other self had not intruded, letting Stile handle things his
way, but the other's presence was increasingly comfort-
able, and his absence increasingly jarring. Now the terrain
seemed less familiar, for his other self's experience with
the land was absent. Also, now the overlapping terrain of
Proton was gone; this was mostly barren rock and sand, in
the science frame, easy to ignore in the presence of the
Phaze vegetation, but still present when one cared to per-
ceive it. Well, at least he would suffer no Citizen malice
here; only the enemy Adepts could reach him.

Was there a valid parallel here? His soul was complete
only when the geography was complete. Could the land be
said to have a soul, perhaps in the form of the special

324

Juxtaposition

mineral that the Citizens of Proton had depleted? It was
odd, in one sense, that the Citizens resisted the transfer of
Phazite, since it would dramatically enrich their world.
But of course they would prefer to keep the frames par-
tially overlapped, linked by the curtain so that in due
course the Citizens could mine in Phaze as well as in
Proton. They would equalize the frames by depleting both.
The fact that such mining would do to the environment of
Phaze what it had done to that of Proton, and also elimi-
nate the remaining magic of Phaze, seemed not to concern
the Citizens. There were, after all, other worlds in the
universe to exploit, once this one was squeezed dry. Since
Stile's transfer of power-mineral would enable the frames
to balance, freeing them to separate, that would forever
deny the Citizens the opportunity of exploitation. They
seemed willfully ignorant of the substantial risk that both
frames would be destroyed long before such exploitation
could be completed. Stile wondered whether the citizens of
ancient Harappa, in the Indian subcontinent of Earth, had
had a similar attitude. Had they denuded the land of its
necessary resources until it could support their population
no longer, so that they weakened and fell to Nordic bar-
barians in the sixteenth century B.C.? Wealth and power at
the expense of nature were an inevitably lethal cancer. But
there seemed to be no gentle way to convince cancer to
practice moderation.

Well, he. Stile, was fated to have considerable power, it
seemed, in the frame of Proton after the separation, and
his other self would have it in Phaze, assuming that
prophecy had priority over the Blue-be-banished prophecy.
The resources of the Oracle-computer, which were obvi-
ously considerable, would be at his disposal, and the self-
willed machines would cooperate. Those machines would
have legal-person status, of course. He would be able to
enforce a more sensible restraint on that errant society.

Stile sighed. Somehow the prospect of all that power
and responsibility did not appeal to him. All he really
wanted was to be in Phaze with his creature friends and
the Lady Blue. That was what he could not have.

Would it be so bad with Sheen? Of course not. She was
the best possible woman, her origin aside. Meanwhile, in

Juxtaposition                     323

Phaze, the Lady Blue would have her real husband back.
She, at least, would not suffer.

Somehow he was not convincing himself.

Soon they were in sight of the unicorn herd, with a
good route for the ball worked out. Stile suffered a pang,
realizing that this was probably the last time he would
see the Lady Blue. He would have to tell her and bid her
farewell—and conceal if he could the way he actually felt
about this coming separation. The break was inevitable; it
was best that it be clean, without hysterics.

The Herd Stallion met him.

"Lord Blue, I will tell our plan, an thou dost prefer,"
Brown volunteered. "Do thou go to Neysa and the Lady."

Stile thanked her; she was a most helpful child at times,
though somehow he was not eager to do what he had to
do. He nerved himself and went directly to the protected
inner circle, where Neysa and the Lady Blue awaited him.

He tried to tell himself he was happy to see them, but
instead he found himself overcome by misgiving. He tried
to smile, but they realized at once that something was
wrong, and both came to him solicitously. "What is the
matter, my Lord?" the Lady asked. "Does the campaign

go ill?"

"It goes well enough," Stile said. He had learned so
much so recently and shared so little with heri They had
just been on their honeymoon, and now it seemed years

past.

"Then what we feared is true," the Lady said, one hand
on Neysa's black mane. "I have my child of thee, and thou
art leaving us."

Was this the extent of her reaction? He knew she was
capable of fierce displays of anger, sorrow, and love. How
could she treat this as if it were commonplace?

"The prophecy of thy second husband no longer pro-
tects me," he said gravely. "Thou hast conceived, and I am
no longer essential. There is another prophecy, that Phaze
will not be safe until the Blue Adept departs it. I am now
the Blue Adept; I would not put this frame in danger
willingly." And he realized as he spoke that the prophecies
could indeed make sense; the present Blue Adept had to
leave so that the defunct Blue Adept could return. Thus

326 Juxtaposition

Blue would both leave and remain, both prophecies hon-
ored. "The frames will separate—and I must return to
mine own."

The Lady nodded. "Somehow I knew it would be thus.
Prophecies care naught for human happiness, only the
letter of their fulfillment."

True; fate did not care. "But thou wilt not be alone,"
Stile said quickly. "The soul of thy first husband, mine
other self, survives. He shall have a human body again."

Her composure faltered. "He lives?"

"Not exactly. He lost his body. But I believe I can
restore it to him, and he will be the same as he was, as far
as anyone can tell."

Her brow furrowed. "But I love thee now!"

"And I love thee. But when thy husband lives, my place
will be elsewhere. I thought him dead, else I would not
have married thee. He gave up his body that Phaze might
be saved, and now he must have it back. This is what is
right."

"Aye, it is right," she agreed. "It is clear where my duty
lies."

She was taking it well—and that, too, was painful. He
knew she loved him but would be loyal to her first hus-
band, as Stile would be loyal to Sheen. This was the way it
had to be. Yet somehow he had hoped that the Lady Blue
would not take it quite this well. Was it so easy to give
him up on such short notice?

Suddenly she flung her arms about him. "Thee, thee,
theel" she cried, and her hot tears made her cheek slippery
as she kissed him.

That was more like it! She was meltingly warm and
sweet and wholly desirable. "Thee, thee, thee," he echoed,
in the Phaze signal of abandonment to love, and held her
crushingly close.

Then, by mutual resignation, they drew apart. She
brought a cloth to his face and cleaned him up, and he
realized that half the tears were his own. Through the blur
he saw the shimmer of the landscape about them, the
reaction of the environment to an expression of deep
truth. The unicorns perceived it too, and were turning to
look at the couple.

juxtaposition                    327

But now they both had control again. They uttered no
further words, letting their statement of love be the last.

Stile turned to Neysa to bid her farewell: But she stood
facing away from him, standing with her tail toward him
—the classic expression of disapproval. The woman might
forgive him his departure; the unicorn did not.

He could not blame her. His body, so recently so warm,
now felt chilled, as if his heart had been frozen. Had he
expected Neysa, his closest friend in Phaze, to welcome his
announcement with forward-perking ears? There was no
good way to conclude this painful scene. Stile walked si-
lently away.

Clip stood near, watching his sister Neysa. His mane
was half flared in anger, and his breath had the tinge of
fire, but he was silent. Stile knew Clip was furious with
Neysa, but had no authority to interfere. There was justice
in it; Neysa expressed the attitude the Lady Blue did not,
in her fashion freeing the Lady to be forgiving. The com-
plete emotion could not be expressed by one person, so
had been portioned between two.

The Brown Adept was waiting for him at the edge of
the unicorn circle. "I told the Stallion," she said. "Hell
help." She looked toward Neysa and the Lady Blue. "I
guess it didn't work out so well, huh?"

"I fear I'm not much for diplomacy," Stile said. "I don't
want to go, they don't want me to go—there's no positive
side."

"Why dost thou not just stay here when the frames
part?" she asked naively.

"I am a usurper here in Phaze. This good life is not
mine to keep—not at the expense of mine other self. I was
brought here to do a job, and when the job is done I must
leave. So it has been prophesied."

"I guess when I'm grown up, maybe 111 understand that
kind of nonsense."

"Maybe," Stile agreed wryly.
. Stile mounted Clip and they returned the way they had
come, setting small markers to show the prospective route
for the ball. There was no interference from the other
Adepts; they were of course biding their time, since they
were unable to strike at him magically at the moment.

328 Juxtaposition

They would have their minions here in force to stop the
ball, though! The unicorns would have an ugly task, pro-
tecting this decoy route. The irony was that this was an
excellent path; if there were no opposition, the ball could
travel rapidly here.

When they recrossed into the zone of juxtaposition, his
other self rejoined him. The personality of Blue assimi-
lated the new experience and shrank away.

'Thou dost look peaked," the Brown Adept said. "Is
aught wrong?"

"It is mine other self," Stile said. "I fear he likes not
what I have done."

"The true Blue? Speak to me, other Adept."

"Aye, Brown," the other self said. "But surely thou dost
not wish to be burdened with the problems of adults."

"Oh, sure," she said eagerly. " 'Specially if it's about a
woman. Some day 111 grow up and break hearts too."

'That thou surely wilt," Blue agreed. "My concern is
this: for many years did I love the Lady Blue, though she
loved me not. When finally I did win her heart as well as
her hand, I learned that she was destined to love another
after me, more than me. This was one reason I yielded
up my life. Now I know it is mine other self she loves. Am
I to return to that situation, at his expense?"

"Oh, that is a bad one!" Brown agreed. "But maybe she
will learn to love thee again. Thou dost have charm, thou
knowest; the Lady Machine's nerve circuits do run hot and
cold when thou dost address her."

"The Lady Machine is programmed to love mine
image," Blue said. "I admit she is a fascinating creature,
like none I have encountered before. But the Lady Blue
is not that type. She will act in all ways proper, as she did
before, and be the finest wife any man could have, but her
deepest heart will never revert. Her love never backtracks."

"Then what good is it, coming back to life?" Brown
asked, with the innocent directness of her age.

"There are other things in life besides love," Blue said.
**The Lady will need protection, and creatures will need
attention. There will be much work for me to do—just as
there will be for mine other self in the fabulous science
frame. He will be no happier than I."

Juxtaposition                     329

Stile had no argument with that. His other self was the
same person as himself, in a superficially different but
fundamentally similar situation, facing life with a woman
who was not precisely right. The days of great adventure
and expectation were almost past. To lose the present en-
gagement would be to die, knowing the frames would in
time perish also as the unrelieved stress developed to the
breaking point. To win would be to return to a somewhat
commonplace existence—for both his selves. The choice
was between disaster and mediocrity.

"I'm not sure I want to grow up, if that's what it's like,"
Brown said.

They reached the baD of Phazite. Sheen had returned to
it also. "Is the other route ready?" Stile asked.

"Not quite. We must delay another hour. But it will be
worth the wait."

"Then I have time to make a golem body for Blue,"
Brown exclaimed. Evidently she had resigned herself
quickly to the situation and was determined to do her part
even if Stile and Blue were not destined for happiness. "I
hope I can do it right. I haven't had much practice with
lifelike figures, especially male ones. My golems are mostly
neuter."

Stile could appreciate the problem. "Maybe Trool can
help. He's quite a sculptor."

Trool appeared. "I model in stone, not wood."

"Well convert stone to flesh," Sheen said. "All we need
is the form."

So while the golems rolled the great ball along its soon-
to-be-diverted course, Trool the troll sculpted in stone. He
excavated a rock from the ground in short order, his huge
gaunt hands scraping the earth and sand away with a
velocity no normal person could approach, and freed a
stone of suitable size by scraping out the rock beneath it
with his stiffened fingers. Apparently the stone became soft
under his touch, like wanning butter. Stile picked up a half-
melted chip and found it to be cold, hard stone. No won-
der trolls could tunnel so readily; the hardest rock was
very much like putty in their hands. No wonder, also, they
were so much feared by ordinary folk. Who could stand
against hands that could gouge solid stone? Trool had




330 Juxtaposition

stood with the Lady Blue against the ogres. Stile remem-
bered, and the ogres had been cautious, not exchanging
blows with him. They had been able to overpower him, of
course, by using their own mode of combat.

When Trool had his man-sized fragment, he glanced at
Stile and began to mold the image. Rapidly, magically, the
form took shape—head, arms, legs. The troll was indeed a
talented sculptor; the statue was perfect. Soon it was stand-
ing braced against a tree—a naked man, complete in every
part, just like Stile.

Sheen and Brown were watching, amazed. "Gee, you
sure are better at carving than I am," Brown said. "My
prede—pred—the former Brown Adept could make figures
just like people, but I can't, yet."

"I can't make them live," Trool said shortly.

Then Sheen made magic from the book, and the statue
turned to flesh. But it remained cold, inanimate. The
Brown Adept laid her hands on it, and it animated—a
golem made of flesh. The new body was ready.

"Say—it worked!" Brown exclaimed, pleased.

Stile wondered how this carved and animated figure
could have living guts and bones and brain. Presumably
these had been taken care of by Sheen's spell. Magic was
funny stuff!

But the soul could not yet enter this body. Two selves
could not exist separately in the zone of juxtaposition. The
second body would only become truly alive when the
frames separated.

"Will it be all right until needed?" Stile asked. "It won't
spoil?"

"My golems don't spoil!" Brown said indignantly. "It
will keep until the soul enters it. Then it'll be alive and will
have to eat and sleep and you-know."

"Then park it in a safe place," he said. "And let the
harmonica remain with it, so that his soul can find it in
case there is a problem." For despite all his planning, Stile
was not at all sure he would succeed in his mission, or
necessarily survive the next few hours. Little had been
heard from the enemy Adepts recently; they had surely
not been idle.

331

Juxtaposition                     JJ >

Sheen conjured body and harmonica to the Blue
Demesnes, which were in no part of the current action.
Stile felt another pang of separation as he lost the har-
monica; it had been such an important part of his life in
Phaze.

The necessary time had passed. They had the golems
start the ball on its new course to the south. "But make a
spell of illusion," Stile directed. "I want it to seem that the
ball is proceeding on the course Brown and I just charted."

"I can generate a ball of similar size, made of ordinary
rock," Sheen said.

"And I'll have some of my golems push it," Brown said.

"It won't be nearly as heavy, so I'll tell them not to push
as hard."

Soon the mock ball diverged from the real one, and a
contingent of golems started it on its way. Stile wasn't sure

how long this would fool the Adepts, but it was worth a
tiy.

Meanwhile, under cover of a fog that Sheen generated,
the main part of the golem force levered the Phazite ball
back toward the Purple Mountains. A door opened in the
hillside, and they saw the tunnel the trolls had made—a
smooth, round tube of just the right size, slanting very
gently down. They rolled the boulder to it, and it began to
travel down its channel on its own.

"From here on, it's easy," Sheen said. "This tube will
carry the Phazite kilometers along in a short time. At the
far end, the tunnel spirals up to the top of a substantial
foothill; from there it can roll north with such momentum

the enemy will not be able to stop it before it crosses into
Proton proper."

"Good strategy," Stile agreed. "But can the golems get it
up that spiral?"

"My friends in Proton have installed a power winch."
Stile laughed. "I keep forgetting we can draw on sci-
ence, too, now! This begins to seem easy!"

They followed the ball as it moved. Stile and Clip fitting
comfortably in the tunnel. Brown's golem steed hunching
over, and Sheen riding a motorized unicycle she had con-
jured. She was enjoying her role as enchantress.




332 Juxtaposition

The ball accelerated, forcing them to hurry to keep it in
sight. Even so, it drew ahead, rounding a bend and disap-
pearing.

They hastened on, but the ball was already around the
next bend, still out of sight. When they passed that bend,
they looked along an extended straightaway—and the ball
was not there.

Stile wasn't sure whether he or his other self first re-
alized the truth. "Hostile magic!" he cried.

"Can't be," Sheen protested. "I had it counterspelled."

"Use a new spell to locate the ball."

She used a simple locator-spell. "It's off to the side," she
said, surprised.

"That last curve—they made a detour!" Stile said. "Had
a crew in to tunnel—no Adept magic—goblins, maybe,
or some borers from Proton—they can draw on the same
resources we can—the ball went down that, while we fol-
lowed the proper channel."

They charged back to the curve. There it was. An off-
shoot tunnel masked by an illusion-spell that had to have
been instituted before Sheen's arrival. The enemy Adepts
had anticipated this tunnel ploy^ and quietly prepared for
it.

No—they couldn't have placed the spell before Sheen
got there, because Sheen had supervised the construction
of the tunnel and had her magic in force throughout.
Something else—ah. The offshoot tunnel was in fact an
old Proton mine shaft. A small amount of work had tied it
in to the new troll tunnel, and a tiny generator had sealed
off the entrance with an opaque force field. No magic, and
minimal effort. Someone had been very clever.

"I don't like this," Stile said. "They evidently know what
we're doing here, and someone with a good mind is on the
scene. We're being outmaneuvered. While we made a
duplicate image of me, they did this."

But there was nothing much to do except go after the
Phazite. They started down the detour tunnel, hoping to
catch up with the ball before it reached whatever destina-
tion the enemy had plotted. Sheen's magic showed no
enemies nearby; like her own workers, they had departed

Juxtaposition                    333

as soon as their job was done. The tunnels were empty

because the presence of anyone could alert the other side
to what was going on.

They heard a noise ahead. Something was moving, heav-
ily, making the tunnel shudder.

Ooopsi The ball of Phazite was rolling back toward
them at horrendous velocity!

"Get out of its wayl" Stile cried. "A hundred and fifty
tons will crush us flat!"

But the ball was moving too swiftly; they could not
outrun it, and the intersection of tunnels was too far back.
"Make a spell. Lady Machinel" Brown screamed.

Sheen made a gesture—and abruptly their entire party
was in the tunnel beyond the rolling ball, watching the
thing retreat. Stile felt weak in the knees, and not because
of their injury. He didn't like being dependent on someone
else for magic. Was that the way others felt about him?

"See—it slants up, there ahead," Brown said brightly.
She, at least, was used to accepting enchantment from
others, though she was Adept herself. "They fixed it up so

the ball would roll up, then reverse and come right back at
us."

'Timed so we would be in the middle when it arrived,"
Sheen said.

"No direct magic—but a neat trap," Stile agreed. "They
must have assumed that if the book blocked out Adept
magic, it would leave us helpless. They didn't realize that a
non-Adept would be doing the spells."

"Funny Trool didn't warn us," Brown said.

Trool appeared, chagrined. "I saw it not. I know not
how I missed it."

For a moment Stile wondered whether the troll could
have betrayed them. But he found he couldn't believe that.
For one thing, he had confidence in his judgment of crea-
tures. For another, it was a woman—a young-seeming
one—who had been prophesied to betray him, and that
had already come to pass before the prophecy reached
him. So there had to have been enough illusion magic, or
clever maneuvering, to deceive everyone in this case; no
betrayal was involved.




334                    Juxtaposition

"Set a deflector at the mouth of the detour," Stile told
Sheen, "so that when the ball reverses again, it will go
down the correct tunnel."

She lifted a finger. "Done."

"You sure know a lot of spells," Brown said.

"Robots assimilate programmed material very rapidly,"
Sheen replied. "The advantages of being a machine are
becoming clearer to me, now that I have considered life."

They marched up to the intersection of tubes. The ball
had already reversed course and traveled down its proper
Channel. They followed it without further event to the
end.

"Be alert for other hostile effects," Stile told Sheen.
"The enemy can't hit us with new magic, but, as we have
seen, the prepared traps can be awkward enough."

Sheen held her finger up as if testing the wind. "No
magic here," she reported.

They stood at the winch. It was a heavy-duty model,
powered by a chip of Protonite, and its massive cables
were adequate to the need. They placed the harness about
the ball; it fitted with little bearings so that the ball could
roll within its confinement. With the pulleys and leverage
available, the ball should move up the spiral.

It did move up. There were no hitches. Yet Stile wor-
ried. He knew the enemy would strike; he didn't know
when and how. Why hadn't they destroyed the winch,
since obviously they had had access to this tunnel? "Trool?"
he asked.

There was no response from the troll. Probably he was
out surveying the situation, and would report the moment
he spied anything significant.

The winch cranked the ball of Phazite up the spiraling
tunnel, providing it the elevation it would need to roll all
the way across the juxtaposition zone to Proton. Once that
boulder started rolling, it should be prohibitively difficult
to stop. Victory seemed very near at hand—and still Stile
worried. He was absolutely sure something ugly was in-
cipient.

At last they reached the top. The winch delivered the
ball to a platform housed in earth, surely resembling a

Juxtaposition                     335

mound of the Little Folk from outside. AH they had to do
now was open the gate and nudge it out.

Trool appeared. "Found thee at lasti" he exclaimed.
*Take not this route, Adepti"

Stile looked at him sourly. "We have already taken this
route. Where hast thou been?"

"Looking all over for theel There are a hundred traces
of thy presence, all mistaken—until this one."

"Diversion magic," Stile said. "False dues to my where-
abouts, laid down in advance, so that I become the needle
in the haystack. But why would they try to mislead thee?"

"Because I have spied on them. Barely did I reach thee
in time to give warning; the goblins have bypassed the
giants, indulged in forced marches, and are lurking in

ambush for thee here. Thou canst not pass this way,
Adept."

"Nonsense," Sheen said. "I detect no goblins within sev-
enty kilometers."

"Thou shouldst get beyond their screening spells," Trool
said. "From behind, they are naught. There are maybe five
hundred goblins there, armed with Proton weapons and
busy making entrenchments. That much did I see; I looked
no more, so that I could return in haste to warn thee. But
then did I face the enchantment that concealed thee from
me. All of it is passive magic, set in place before we
came here, yet a nuisance."

"I knew things were too easy," Stile muttered. 'They
left us alone so we would continue on into their trap. We
have perhaps four hours remaining to get the Phazite
across the north border of the juxtaposition zone. We can
not backtrack now. We shall have to proceed."

"I can neutralize the screen magic," Sheen said. "But
that will not remove the goblins. The enemy Adepts will
prevent me from performing any mass spell on them."

"So there are, after all, limits to the book," Stile said
with a wry smile.

"Yes. It gives me power to stand off all the Adepts—but

not to overwhelm them. We shall have to handle the gob-
lins physically."

"The animalheads are arriving on the scene," Trool




336 Juxtaposition

said. "But they, too, are confused by the shield-spells. If
thou dost eliminate the shields, all will encounter each
other and there will be mayhem galore."

"I don't want mayhem," Stile said. "But if it has to be, I
want to ease the burden on the animalheads. Sheen, con-
jure me a holophone."

In a moment it was there. Stile called his own dome,
and Mellon answered. His leg had been repaired. "I am
glad to see you back in form, sir," he said.

Stile was sure the call was tapped and might soon be
blocked off. "I'm in a battle situation and need reinforce-
ments," he said quickly. "I can't arrange to conjure large
groups, so they'll have to march. The goblins are enemies
and will slaughter whomever they can; the other creatures,
however strange they may appear, are friends. Can you
arrange anything?"

"Allow thirty minutes, sir." The image faded.

So, just like that, it was done. Mellon would get the
coordinates of Stile's location from the holo and would
send out what he could. Stile's Citizen resources were now
considerable; he could afford a private army, if anyone
could.

He returned to his immediate situation. "If the goblins
have Proton weapons, we'll need Proton defenses. They
are probably making ready to storm this hill. We should
have light, bulletproof armor, laser screens—"

"Personal force fields," Sheen suggested. "They will
handle a combination of attacks, and I can conjure in such
small units without alerting the enemy Adepts."

"And make invisibility-spells for the rest of us," Brown
added. "They'll know we're near the Phazite ball, but
still—"

"Yes," Stile agreed. "Probably they won't want to fire
their shots too close to the Phazite; they won't have effect,
and if they did, what would it be? There's power to destroy
the planet in this dense little sphere; no one would gain if
that energy were suddenly released."

"Most likely they will attempt to wipe us out, and send
the ball rolling back down the spiral tube," Sheen said.
"Then they will blast the entrance closed and wait for the

Juxtaposition                     337

juxtaposition to terminate. Clef surely can't hold it much
longer."

"We're committed to our present course," Stile said,
shaking his head ruefully. "They gave us full opportunity
to go beyond the point of retreat. I'd like to meet the
goblin commander; he's one smart tactician."
"Maybe an Adept is running things," Brown said.
"This smacks more of field tactics to me." Stile brought
out his map. "As I make it, the ball has a fairly straight
path north from here. All we need to do is clear out a few
obstacles in the channel and start it rolling. We don't want
to mire it in the lake, unless that's beyond the juxtaposi-
tion zone. Trool, where is the north side of the curtain
now?"

"It is stabilized north of the lake and north of the Ora-
cle's palace, in this section," the troll replied. "There is
some curve in it yet; elsewhere it impinges the White
Mountain range, but here it is fairly southerly."

"And where is it in this section?" Stile asked, indicating
the place where the Oracle-computer was buried, some-
what removed from the Oracle's palace.

"It slants northwest, passing just south of that region.
But that is not a good place to roll the ball anyway; there
is a long incline up, with the curtain almost at the ridge

there. Much easier to roll it through the valley to the
east."

So the curtain was just south of the Oracle-computer.
That was why there had been no news of the computer's
crossing; Clef's Flute had not been able to broaden the
juxtaposition zone enough. That meant the curtain would
have to be stretched northward a little—and how would
Stile find the creature-power to accomplish that, in the
midst of battle?

"Nevertheless, I believe we'll roll it across at this site,"
Stile said, after reflecting a moment. "I hope the giants
arrive in time to help; they'll be able to roll it barehanded."

"I'm not sure," Sheen said. "The ball of Phazite is the
same diameter as a giant's finger—but its substance is fifty
times as dense as living flesh. Trying to push on it could be
clumsy and painful."




338

Juxtaposition

"They can use silver thimbles, or roll it with a pool
cue," Stile said, smiling briefly.

"And the route," she said. "Why roll the ball across that
particular place?"

Stile did not want to express his notion openly, for
fear the enemy was somehow eavesdropping. "Because it
will be difficult, slow, but certain; the enemy will not have
barriers entrenched there, and no special traps, and our
time will be running out."

"That's not fully logical," she protested. "The enemy
will not guard that region well, because the natural terrain
represents a formidable defense. They will have time to
regroup while we struggle to push the ball up the hill."
"Maybe," Stile agreed.

"I hope your illogic has some redeeming aspect."
"I think thou art crazy," Brown said succinctly.
^'We'11 dear a course that curves northwest," Stile said.
"They may assume it's another ruse. Then we'll roll the
ball along it as fast and far as we can and hope for the
best."

Trool faded out for another survey and returned to
report that the contingent from Proton was arriving.
"Resh and metal men," he said wonderingly.

"Cyborgs, maybe. Robots with human brains. They can
be very effective. It's time for us to move." He looked
around the chamber. "I want the golem crew to remain
here, to start the ball rolling at my signal. Timing is essen-
tial. Brown will supervise them. Sheen and I will sneak out
and clear the path. Trool will act as liaison."
"I want to sneak out tool" Brown cried.
<tWhat about me?" Clip asked, in man-form.
Stile had been afraid of this. He had to devise legitimate
jobs for everyone. "Thou canst go report to thy herd," he
said to the unicorn. "In thy hawk-form and with a spell of
invisibility, thou canst get through to tell the Stallion of
our situation." Stile turned to Brown. "But thou—if thou
shouldst go, who will guard the book?"

Her brown eyes widened. "The book of magic?"
"If the enemy gets its hands on that, we're finished. We
dare not take it out to battle. Sheen has memorized the

Juxtaposition                     339

spells she needs; she doesn't need the book with her now.
So it is safest with thee and thy golems."

Brown's eyes fixed on the book, round with awe. "I
guess..." she breathed.

The main reason Stile wanted her here was to keep the
child out of the worst danger. Any protective spell they
might make might be negated by a specific enemy counter-
spell. The book did need guarding, so it was a valid pretext.

He left with Sheen, using an invisibility-spell as well as
the protective shields she had fashioned before. He
doubted the two of them would remain undiscovered, but
with luck, the goblin army should be distracted by the
detachments of serfs, robots, and animalheads.

They started down the slope, using conjured spades to
eliminate troublesome ridges. This, too, was risky, since
the changes they made were visible, possibly calling atten-
tion to their otherwise invisible progress. Most of the slope

was all right, with a natural channel requiring only touch-
ing up.

But as they got away from the ball, the illusion fash-
ioned by the enemy Adepts faded. They saw the goblins
ranged about the base of the hill, pistols drawn. The mo-
ment there was any visible action at the top of the slope,
the goblins would start firing.

Even in this hiatus, it was bad enough. Detachments of
goblins were building a series of obstructions near the base
of the slope, wedgelike barriers with the sharp ends
pointed uphill. If the Phazite ball encountered a wall
crosswise, it would crash right through; but these wedges
were oriented to deflect it efficiently off-course, where it
could be further deflected by the natural channels below,
until it was stuck in some cul-de-sac, and the game would
be lost. That smart enemy commander's handiwork againi
"Our work is cut out for us," Stile said. "One misplay, and
we lose the ball. Conjure me some plastic explosive and
detonators that can be set off by magic invocation. Ill
have to mine some of those barriers."

"That sort of thing is not in the book," Sheen protested.
"No plastic explosive with magic detonators! But I can get
you one-hour timed explosive."

Juxtaposition

340

"That will do. Just let me know when the hour is up so

I can get clear."

She conjured the explosive. It was high-grade; a 'kilo-
gram had enough explosive power to blast away all the
emplacements they would have time to mine. They walked

on down the hill.

The contingent from Proton was marching toward the
hffl. Stile realized that it was on the wrong side of the
illusion-spell and did not perceive the goblin army; the
goblins would ambush it, wiping it out before it had a
chance to organize. "I can't let that happen," he muttered.
'I haven't been much of an organizer; my allies will be cut
down, trying to help me. I must warn theml"

"If you show yourself, you will be cut down!" Sheen
said. "My spells won't save you from attack by the entire
goblin army, backed by the magic of all the Adepts."

"Maybe your magic can help, though. Generate an
image of me, like a holograph. Then you can jump it
around, and no one will know exactly where I am, so the
enemy won't be able to attack me."

"Now that might work," she said. "It's risky, but so are
the alternatives. Your convoluted organic brain does come
up with artful wrinkles." She made a combination of ges-
tures and sounds, sketched a little figure in the dirt—he
could see it and her, as the invisibility-spell affected only
the enemy's observers—and suddenly Stile found himself
standing in the path of the cyborgs. He felt a squeeze on
his hand and knew Sheen was with him, and that his
consciousness had joined his distant image. This was
clever magic; his respect for the book increased.

The leader of the cyborgs spied him and approached.
This was an obvious machine, with gleaming metal limbs
and chambers for attachments on its torso. But it was no
robot; the brain was human, taken from the body of some
aging, or ill, living person. Cyborgs could be exceedingly
tough and clever. "I perceive you, sir," the machine-man
said, orienting a lens on him. "But you have no substance.
You are therefore an image. I can not be sure of your
validity. Please identify yourself in a manner I can ac-
cept."

Juxtaposition                     341

"I am an image of Citizen Stile," Stile said. "Also the
Blue Adept. My employee Mellon should have primed you
with key information about me. Ask me something appro-
priate."

"Yes, sir. Who is your best friend?"
"In which frame?"
"That sumces, sir."

Oh. Clever. It was the type of response, rather than the
actual information, that had been keyed. "Let's get busy,
then," Stile said. "This region is infested with goblins with
modem weapons. I doubt they are good shots, but don't
take chances. If you can drive them away from this area,
that would be a big help. But don't attack any animalheads
or unicorns. There's quite a bit of illusion magic around,
so be careful."
"We understand, sir."

"I'm not sure you do. Send out scouts to the base of
that slope." He indicated it. "They will pass the line of
illusion and see the truth. Pay attention to what they tell
you. This is likely to be deadly serious; your lives are in
jeopardy."
"Thank you, sir."

They would have to find out for themselves. Stile mur-
mured the word "animalhead" and found himself on a hill
where the animalheads were gathered. The elephanthead
chief spied him with a trumpet of gladness. "We have
found thee at last. Adept!" he exclaimed; evidently Stile's
prior spell of intelligibility remained in force. Spells did
seem to have a certain inertia about them, continuing in-
definitely unless countered or canceled. "We feared our-
selves lost."

Quickly Stile briefed the elephant on the situation.
"Now I'll be clearing a path for the ball to roll along," he
concluded. "In mine own body I'm invisible, but the gob-
lins will quickly catch on and interfere. So if thy force can
divert them from this side, and while the cyborgs operate
on the other side—"

"Cyborgs?"

"They are combination people, part human, part ma-
chine, strange in appearance but worthwhile when—"




342 Juxtaposition

"They are like usi"

"Very like thy kind," Stile agreed, startled.

"We are ready," the elephanfhead said.

Now Stile was prepared to place the first wad of explo-
sive. But as he returned his awareness to his invisible
body, he discovered that Sheen was already attending to it.
She had mined two wedges and was on the third. But the
goblins were all about, digging their trenches and organiz-
ing themselves for the battle.

Stile had always thought of goblins as occurring in un-
disciplined hordes; these were highly disciplined. They
were supervised by sergeants and commissioned officers,
their insignia of rank painted or tattooed on their arms.

Despite his indetectability. Stile was nervous. There
were too many goblins, and they were poking around too
many places; at any time, one of them could make a
chance discovery of the plastic explosive. He needed to
distract the goblins' attention right now, before the cy-
borgs and animalheads went into action, lest his game be
lost at the outset.

"Goblin leader," he murmured.

He stood beside a command tent. An ugly goblin with
an authoritative air was surveying the field with binocu-
lars. "I trust it not," the goblin murmured. "They be too
quiet."

"Perhaps I can help thee," Stile said.

The goblin glanced quickly at him, showing no surprise.
"I had thought to see thee ere now. Adept," he said. "I be
Grossnose, commander of this expedition."

Stile could appreciate the derivation of the name; the
goblin's nose was unusually large, and shaped like a many-
eyed potato. But physical appearance had little to do with
competence. Stile found himself liking this creature, for no
better reason than that he must have risen to power in
much the way Stile himself had, overcoming the liability
of appearance to make his place in his society. "I compli-
ment thy expertise," Stile said. "I had thought thy forces
to be intercepted by our ogre detachment."

"We force-marched around the ogres," Grossnose said.
"They be not our enemy."

343

Juxtaposition                     343

"I prefer not to be thine enemy, either."
"Then hear our terms for peace: leave the Phazite in

place, and thy party will be granted safe passage else-
where."

"Declined," Stile said. "But if thy troops depart in
peace, we will not hinder them."

"Now understand this. Adept. If fight we must, we shall
be forced to Seek the source of thy power. We shall make
a thrust for the book. We have held off so far only that it
be not destroyed. The book may be more valuable than
that entire ball of Phazite, and it were a shame to put it
into hazard. But this forbearance makes mischief; already
the Adepts be quarreling as to who shall possess that book.
I prefer to leave it in thy hands, as thou art least cor-
ruptible by power. But I can not allow that demon ball to
Cross to Proton-frame; that be the end."

"The end of the present order, mayhap," Stile said. "For
Citizens and Adepts. They will have to share power more
equitably in the new order. Other creatures will have pro-
portionately more power, including thine own kind. Dost
thou really oppose that?"

"Nay," the goblin admitted with surprising candor. "But
I do serve the present order."

This was an honest, clever, incorruptible commander,
the worst kind to oppose. "I regret what will come to
pass," Stile said. "If we meet again after this is over, I

would like to converse with thee again. But this next hour
we are enemies."

"Aye. Go about thy business. Adept. Thou dost know
what be in the making."

Stile knew. It was the irony of war that slaughter and
destruction came about when both sides preferred peace.
He faded out, and found himself back with Sheen.

"We have to move fast," he said. "They are going to go
after the book."

Indeed, a troop of goblins were already charging the
hill, lasers blazing. But they were met by the animalheads,
who sprang from ambush and grappled with the goblins
before the latter's modem weapons could be brought into
play against this close-range opponent. The goblins' inex-




Juxtaposition

344

perience with such weapons cost the enemy dearly now;

the animalheads were wresting them from the goblins and
using them themselves.

Simultaneously the cyborgs commenced action—and
their weapons were completely modem. Some had stun-
ners, some gas jets, some lasers, and some projectile hurl-
ers, and they knew how to use them. The battle was on.

Stile and Sheen moved hastily along their projected
channel, placing the remaining explosive. Their hour was
passing, and the plastic would detonate at its assigned
moment regardless of their proximity. It was funny stun,
gray-white and slightly tacky to the touch, like modeling
day; it could be torn into fragments of any size, shaped as
desired, and it would adhere to whatever it was pressed
against. They fitted it into the chinks of stones like mortar,
and on the undersurfaces of wooden beams. The goblins
should not notice the plastic unless warned about its na-
ture.

The sounds of fhe battle behind became louder. Stile
looked back—and saw a squadron of winged dragons com-
ing from the south. The cyborgs fired bazookas at them.
Their aim was excellent—but after the first few dragons
went down in flames, the others took evasive action. They
dived down close to fhe ground and strafed the cyborgs
with their flaming breath. The goblins who had been en-
gaging the cyborgs screamed; that strafing was hurting
them, while the metal bodies of the machine-men with-
stood the heat better. The dragons might as well have been

the cyborgs' allies.

"Keep moving," Sheen cautioned Stile. Indeed, he had
become distracted by the action, forgetting his own impor-
tant role. He hurried to place more plastic.

But haste made waste. They ran out of plastic and time
before the job was done; several barriers remained. They
had had enough of each, and had wasted part of both.
"We must move," Sheen warned. "In ten minutes the plas-
tic detonates, with or without us."

"Better head back for the ball," Stile said. "I want to be
ready just before the plastic goes off, so we can start the
ball rolling right at the moment of goblin disorganization."

Juxtaposition                     345

They began running back toward the Phazite. New con-
tingents of goblins were arriving from the north; they were
swarming all over. Stile saw that the enemy was winning
the battle of the hill; both animalheads and cyborgs were
being contained and decimated. The goblins were absorb-
ing huge losses, but prevailing because of their greater
numbers and overall organization. A new force was ad-
vancing toward the Phazite. They would overrun the site
before Stile could return.

"Conjure us there!" he cried.

"Can't," Sheen snapped. "The enemy Adepts have fo-
cused their full attention on this place, blocking off new
magic. They're learning how to impede the potent book
spells by acting together. This is the final squeeze. Stile."

"Then send my image there; that's an existing spell."

Suddenly his image was in the chamber. There were the
Brown Adept and the troll, holding laser rifles clumsily,
trying to oppose the advancing goblins. The remaining
golems stood about awkwardly; their hands were not Co-
ordinated enough to handle modem weapons, and their
wooden minds not dever enough to grasp this rapidly
changing situation.

"That's no good," Stile said. "You can't stop a hundred
vicious goblins by yourselves."

They looked at him, startled. "We feared for theel"
Brown exclaimed.

"Fear for thyself; they will be upon thee before I can
return in the flesh. They want the book, and we must keep
it away from them at any cost." Stile pondered a moment.
"Trool—canst thou take Brown and the book into the
tunnel and shield them with thine invisibility?"

Trool faded out. In a moment Brown faded out too.
"Aye," his voice came. "But it is not safe in the tunnel,
Adept; goblins are coming from the far end. We have
blocked them off for the moment, but—"

"Canst thou fly with her to safety?" Stile cut in. Time
was so short! "It need be but for a few minutes, until the
explosive we have set goes off. Then will the enemy Adepts'
attention be distracted, and we can use the spells of the
book to protect ourselves."




346 Juxtaposition

"I will by," Trool's voice came. From several feet up,
Brown cried, "Hey, this is funi" Then they were out a
ceiling aperture and away.

The goblins burst in, caving in the mound walls with
pikes. They spied Stile and charged him—but their points
had no effect on his image. On inspiration, he pretended
that he could be hurt, and dodged about to avoid the
thrusts, so as to distract them as long as possible. He
didn't want them working on the Phazite ball, now vulner-
able.

The golems were still standing awkwardly. Stile realized
that they needed to be told what to do. "Protect your-
selvesi" he cried. "Golems, fight the goblinsi"

Now the golems acted. They were neither smart nor
swift, but they were as tough as wooden planks. The gob-
lins swarmed over each golem and were hurled back vio-
lently. Yes, it was after all possible to make a decent fight
of it!

Abruptly he was back with Sheen, at the base of the
hill. The two of them were running through the battlefield,
and it was grim. Goblins and animalheads lay dead and
dying. This was where the animalheads had been fated to
lose half their number, he realized. Some cyborgs were
here too, their metal lying twisted and smoking; Stile saw
one with its metal skull cracked open, the human brain
exposed and shriveled. The odor of carnage was strong.

"We must find help," Sheen said, "to clean out the
goblins and get the ball rolling."

"I wish we could save these creatures in pain," Stile
said.

"We can't do it now. Once the ball crosses, we can."

Stile knew it was true. They had to move the ball first.
Now only seconds remained before the plastic detonated.

They found a bearhead just recovering consciousness.
Stile put his hand on the creature's shoulder, breaking the
invisibility-spell for this one individual. "We need thee,"
Stile said. "Follow us."

"Aye, Blue," the bearhead agreed dizzily.

Sheen found a cyborg in the process of self-repair; it
had lost-a foot, but was affixing the foot of a dead cyborg

Juxtaposition                     347

in its place. Sheen introduced herself similarly. The four
hurried on.

As they reached the crest of the hill, they smelled
smoke. Something was burning in the mound. "The
golemsl" Sheen said grimly.

Stile winced. He knew the wooden golems were not
truly alive, but surely they hurt when they burned. The
goblins had used a devastating weapon, and the Brown
Adept would be mortified.

They charged the mound, staring into its broken cham-
ber. In the smoke of the golem bonfire, the goblins were
trying to push the ball back into the spiral tube. The ball
was shaking, starting to rock. Soon they would get it mov-
ing.

The four burst into the chamber. The goblins cried out
and scattered as they saw the bearhead and cyborg, but
rallied in a moment and drew their weapons. Stile and
Sheen, invisible to them, knocked the pistols from the
goblins' hands. Unable to fathom this new menace, the
goblins nevertheless fought bravely, overwhelming their
opposition, both visible and invisible, by force of numbers.

Then the plastic explosive detonated. The barrier
wedges blew up, raining fiery pieces on the heads of the
goblin army. The goblins in the mound disengaged and

dashed out to see what new danger threatened. There was
general disorganization.

"Now we roll it!" Stile cried. The four of them, joined
by a charred but surviving golem, picked up the scattered
limbs of golems and their tools and started levering the
ball forward. They were more disciplined and purposeful
than the goblins had been, and the ball was poised for this
direction, but it was so massive they had just as much
trouble budging it. "We need better levers!" Stile gasped.
But he knew of none within range—and now they heard
the goblins charging up the spiral tunnel. There was no
time for a search.

A hawk flew into the chamber, "dip!" Stile exclaimed.
"What art thou doing here?"

The unicorn changed to man-form. "I knew thou
wouldst foul it up by thyself. Adept," he said. "Mere men
always do. So I brought some friends to bail thee out."




348 Juxtaposition

Now a bee, a hummingbird, and a blue heron flew in,
changing to three more unicorns. The third had an irides-
cent mane. "Bellel" Stile said, recognizing her.

"She was wandering toward the battle," Clip said diffi-
dently. "I could not leave her to such danger, and she does
feel she owes thee. Adept, for the manner in which she
was used to—"

"Yes, of coursel" Stile agreed. "The four of you—help
us push this ball down the hilll"

Clip shifted to equine form and played musical direc-
tions on his sax-hom. He was answered by a violin, tuba,
and ringing-bell tune of agreement. The four put their
horns carefully down into the crevice between ball and
floor; then, musically coordinated, they levered up and

forward.

Just like that, the ball moved. The unicorns repeated the
process, working it over the dirt and rubble and outside. It
was a slow, difficult task, but they worked well and kept
the ball crunching forward.

Goblins burst in from the spiral tunnel. Stile, Sheen,
and the bearhead, the cyborg, and the remaining golem
turned to face them, protecting the unicorns' flanks. The
goblins, seeing only three motley opponents, charged—and
discovered the hard way that there were five. In this
cramped, littered space, it was a fair match.

Then the ball nudged over the brink and started rolling
down the slope in the direction Stile had dictated. The
unicorns, their task done, turned to face the goblins—who
suddenly lost their eagerness to fight, seeing the odds shift
so substantially.

"Mounti" Stile cried, trusting the unicorns to cooperate.
"Follow that balll" And he leaped onto the nearest steed—
who happened to be Belle. She spooked, never before hav-
ing borne a rider, but heard Clip's musical clarification
and immediately settled down. Sheen took the golem and
mounted Clip, and the bearhead and cyborg mounted the
remaining two. They charged down the slope.

For an instant Stile was daunted by the improbability of
it all: a man, a cyborg, a robot, an animalhead, and a
wooden golem, all riding unicorns through a battlefield
strewn with goblins and dragons, pursuing an invaluable

Juxtaposition

349

ball of power-rock that rolled along a channel cleared by
plastic explosive. What a mishmashi

Mishmash? No—this was juxtaposition. The complete
mergence of magic and science. He should enjoy it while it
lasted, for it would not last long. Already he thought he
felt the influence of the Platinum Flute weakening, as the
strength of the Foreordained became exhausted.

Belle was a fine steed, running smoothly and swiftly, her
lovely mane like silk in his grasp. But of course she was
smooth; she had won the Unolympics dance event! "Belle,
I thank thee for this service," he breathed, knowing she
heard him despite the rush of air and booming of the
passage of the Phazite ball, for her left ear rotated toward
him. "I will try to do thee some return favor, when I can."
And she made a faint bell-melody in response.

Meanwhile, the ball was gathering velocity. It crunched
down the hill, leaving its smooth, small channel. Where
bodies were in the way, they too were flattened. The
Phazite was ponderous and inexorable, crushing every-
thing in its path. The live goblins, seeing its onrush, scat-
tered out of its way in alarm. This was the sensible thing
to do.

The four unicorns galloped after it, losing headway as
the ball rolled down the steepest section of the slope. All
the goblins were watching it now, seeing its passage
through the erstwhile barriers. For them, this progress was
disaster.

But Stile knew the war was not over. Several barriers
remained in place, and the slope reversed farther to the
north. Stile's big gamble was with the giants and the route.
If he had judged all aspects correctly, he would win—but
at this moment he was in severe doubt.

The ball encountered the standing barrier wedges and
blew them apart. They had not diverted it perceptibly, and
seemed not to have slowed it, but Stile knew crucial im-
petus had been lost. Would the ball carry far enough?

Now the terrain was gently rolling, largely clear of trees.
Stile had planned this carefully on the map. The ball sailed
up the slope, and down, and onward. It was right on
target. But it was slowing, as it had to, for the incidental
resistance of the miles was cumulative.

350 Juxtaposition

The Proton-frame terrain, unobtrusive so far because of
its barrenness, suddenly became prominent in the form of
a cluster of force-Held domes. The isolated estates of Citi-
zens, perhaps occupied at the moment, perhaps not. There
was a peculiar appeal to such technology set in such an
absolutely barren environment, a nugget of complete
wealth in complete poverty, like a diamond in sand.

Strange that he should see it this way. Stile thought—
then realized that it was in fact the perspective of his other
self, to whom the entire frame of Proton was a novelty,
much as the frame of Phaze was to Stile. What was com-
monplace to Stile was a miraculous new discovery to Blue.

The ball was rolling toward a linked trio of small
domes. The connecting tubes arched high, leaving suffi-
cient clearance below to pass the Phazite—but the ball
eschewed that obvious passage to crash right into the
westernmost dome. The dome disappeared as its force-field
generator was taken out, leaving the serfs gasping in ex-
pectation of the sudden decompression. But there was the
Phaze atmosphere, here in the juxtaposition; they discov-
ered to their surprise that they could breathe quite well
outside. It was every bit as real as the ball, of course.

One serf ran blindly out in front of Stile's steed; Belle
tried to swerve, but the serf's erratic course made avoid-
ance uncertain. "Serf—turfl" Stile sang, willing the mes-
sage. He wanted the man to be removed to a safe spot,
suitable turf. Nothing happened, and he realized that
Sheen's repressive enchantment against Adept spells re-
mained in force. Fortunately Belle managed to miss the
man, and they galloped on past the domes. Just as well the
magic hadn't worked; the enemy Adepts would be casting
spells furiously now, trying to sidetrack the Phazite, to
conjure imposing barriers or trenches in its path, and
Sheen's counterspell was the only protection against this.

It was not hard to keep up with the ball now as it slowly
lost velocity. Had Stile started it at a different angle, it
could have proceeded down a long valley and maintained
speed. But he had elected to go the more difficult, surpris-
'ing route, gambling the fate of the frames on his hunch.
The giants should be arriving soon, and the other thing—
he would not say, lest it be overheard.

351

Juxtaposition                     aai

The slope changed, and the ball slowed more definitely.
This was the beginning of the rise he knew would balk it.
No goblins were in evidence; he had at least been. success-
ful in fooling them. Probably there was a huge concentra-
tion at the other route and many barriers, pits, and various

obstructive things. If the giants arrived in time, there
would be no trouble.

At last the ball stopped, settling into a soft pocket so
firmly that it was obvious that their present force could
not budge it. They rode up and paused beside it. "What
now. Stile?" Sheen inquired with a certain unrobotic edge.

"You unicorns change suits and fly up and see if you
can spot the giants," Stile said. "They should be close now.
Tell them we need help in a hurry."

The four unicorns shifted immediately to their airborne
forms and zoomed into the sky. "I'll check too," Stile said

to Sheen. "Project my image in a fast survey around the
area."

She did. Soon he verified that the goblins were indeed
massed at the valley route in horrendous number—but
already they were marching toward the ball's present loca-
tion. It would not be long before they got there. The giants
just had to get there first!

The unicorns were successful. In a moment, three of the
towering giants appeared, striding across the horizon, their
heads literally lost in the clouds. They had been following
the progress of the ball with giant field glasses, so had been
ready to intercept it when it was stopped.

Stile had Sheen terminate their spells of invisibility and
protection against attack, as these were no longer useful or
necessary. Now Stile needed to be seen, to help organize
the giants for their giant effort.

Soon the giants were using huge metal canes to propel
the ball forward, up the slope, following the route Stile
dictated. The giants enjoyed this; it was like a giant game
of pool, knocking the tiny but extremely solid ball along.
If they did it improperly, their pool cues broke, which was
inconvenient.

The first elements of the goblin army arrived too late;

the ball was well on its way. Stile and his companions
were galloping after it.




juxtaposition

352

Now, Stile thought, was the critical time. If the canny
goblin commander did what Stile expected him to—

"There's no way the goblins can stop the giants," Sheen
said. "We've won! Clip says the other side of the curtain is
this side of the crest of the hill. We're nearly there!"

But another contingent of goblins was arriving at the
hill. They did not try to oppose the giants; instead they
marched ahead, as if clearing the way, which was strange.
The giants, unperturbed, kept pushing the ball, taking
turns with their cues. Even for them, it was very heavy,
and progress slowed as they tired and their cues broke.

"The line should be right about here," Sheen said.

"Not any more," Stile told her. "The goblins are moving
it."

Now she caught on. "No! We aren't gaining at all,
theni"

"Oh, we'll get there," Stile said. "This only means delay.
The giants are tired; it will take longer to crest the hill."

"I should think so," she agreed, eyeing the steep, almost
cliff-faced crest. "You anticipated this? Why did you come
here, then? The giants could have pushed it around the hill
and across the curtain much faster, and we could have
won the game by now. As it is, the enemy will have time
to set up something worse."

"Yes," Stile agreed gravely.

The giant currently taking aim at the ball paused. He
shook himself, and sweat flung out from him like rain.

"You'll have a workers' revolt soon," Sheen cautioned.
"You've got to have some reason for this foolishness."

But Stile was listening for something. Now at last he
heard it: an abrupt intensification of the faint Flute music
in the background.

"The Oracle has just crossed the line," Stile announced.
"Or rather, the line has crossed the Oracle. That computer
is now within the zone of juxtaposition. From there, it can
use its own stored moving equipment to transport itself the
rest of the way to Proton."

"The Oracle!" Sheen exclaimed. "It had to cross to Pro-
ton to complete the exchange. To be able to make its vast
expertise available for the reorganization of the Proton
economic complex."

Juxtaposition                     353

"The goblins have just enabled it to do that," Stile
agreed. "Now we can tip the ball over the crest, roll it
down across the line—and Clef can let the curtain collapse
into singularity and vanish."

"You did have a cunning notion I You knew the curtain
had not spread far enough, that the Oracle was hung up
here, right under this mound, so you—"

"We still have to get the ball across," Stile reminded
her. "We haven't won yet."

But now the giants renewed their efforts. The ball was
shoved up over the cliff face with a convulsive joint effort,
and began its inexorable roll down toward the curtain.

They charged up after it, scrambling for handholds at
the brink, feeling the exhilaration of victory. As they
crested the ridge, they saw the opposite slope blackened
with goblins; all the rest of that army had force-marched
here for the final confrontation.

The individual goblins could not stop the massively roll-
ing ball, of course; they plunged desperately from its path.
The slope was so steep that even the giants would be hard
put to halt the ball before it crossed the curtain halfway
down.

On the horizon Stile now spied the ogres, who had just
arrived on the scene. They were ready to fight, but were
understandably hesitant about wading into so vast an army
of goblins. But it seemed the ogres would not be needed
now.

On the next hill to the north was a device Stile recog-
nized only from his researches into planetary warfare—a
nuclear cannon. Powered by atomic fusion, this pre-
Protonite weapon could fire a solid projectile into deep
space—or into any object in its viewfinder at a lesser
range. Stile knew the canny Grossnose would have it
loaded with a half-ton slug of Protonite—the only sub-
stance that could have a proper effect on the rolling ball.
The goblin commander had devised his strategy to counter
Stile's strategy without pause.

"Get back over the ridge!" Stile cried. "Down, giantsl
Now!"

The earth trembled as they obeyed, trusting his warning.




354                    Juxtaposition

Giants, unicorns, and otheis all huddled in the shelter of
the ridge.

The cannon fired. The Phazite ball exploded 'into thou-
sands of fragments and a great cloud of dust. Phazite
rained down around them in the form of stones, pebbles,
gravel, and sand.

Sheen jumped to cover Stile's body with her own
tougher one, and the cyborg did the same for the bear-
head. The unicorns changed to their flying forms and hud-
dled under the same shelters. But the giants were in some
discomfort; they swatted at the pieces that struck them, as
if bitten by gnats.

Now the great goblin army went into action, obviously
rehearsed. Each goblin ran to pick up one fragment of
Phazite and carry it south, away from the border of the
juxtaposition. "No!" Sheen cried. "Fragmentation doesn't
matter, so long as it gets across the line to Proton-frame.
But this will finish usi"

Grossnose's final ploy had been a brilliant one. Once
more the goblin had outmaneuvered Stile, giving up a
lesser thing—in this case the Oracle—for the sake of a
greater one. The ball had had to crest the hill to come into
range of the nuclear cannon.

But Stile refused to give up. One hope remained.
"Trooll Brownl" Stile called. "If you hear me—use the
bookl Do something while the enemy Adepts are relaxing
in victory!" Did they hear? Could Brown locate a spell and
use it in time? Stile was afraid not.

Suddenly there was a strange wrenching, as of vastly
potent magic gone astray. Then the world stabilized, seem-
ingly unchanged. The goblins still charged forward with
their burdens, seeming slighfly dizzy but hardly incapaci-
tated.

Sheen looked at Stile in despair as the last of the sand-
fall cleared. "We can't possibly stop them all," she said.
"We have ogres and unicorns, but there are too many
goblins, too hard to catch. The book-spell failed, or was
blocked by the other Adepts. Lady Brown simply lacks the
experience to use that sort of magic properly."

"I don't know," Stile said. "That didn't feel like blocked

Juxtaposition                     355

magic." He was getting a notion what it might have been,
but decided not to say. It could not make a difference at
this point. "Let the goblins be; no sense getting ourselves
in trouble in a futile effort."

The giants and unicorns turned away from him in dis-
gust, but left the goblins alone. Soon virtually all of the
Phazite was gone, carried away in pieces or in bagfuls. The
battle was over.

Commander Grossnose strode over the crest. "Con-
gratulations on an excellent campaign. Adept," he said
graciously. "Thou didst trick me on crossing the Oracle—
but I countered with the cannon. The power of the Oracle
in nonseparated frames becomes moot. But if thou
wouldst be so good as to answer a point of curiosity—"

"Certainly," Stile agreed.

"What was the nature of that last great spell thou didst
attempt to perform? I felt its vasty power—but naught
happened."

Trool and the Brown Adept appeared, she with the book
of magic clutched in her arms. "We can answer that,
goblin," she said. "It was reversal."

Grossnose's constricted brow wrinkled. "Reversal? I
understand that not."

"Thou knowest—changing directions. So west turns
east, and north turns south—or seems to. The Oracle told
us to do it, once it got into jux and could use its holo—
hologramp—its magic pictures to talk to us. That's one
smart machine!"

"North turns south?" the goblin asked, dismay infiltrat-
ing his face.

"Yep. Thine army just carried all the Phazite the wrong
way—north across the line."

The goblin commander stood for a long moment, ab-
sorbing that, grasping the accuracy and import of the
Statement. All of them had been deceived, for it had been
an extremely powerful spell of a quite unanticipated sort—
as it had needed to be, to avoid interference by the enemy
Adepts.

Grossnose turned again to Stile. "Congratulations on a
better ^campaign than I knew. Adept," he said gravely, as




356                    Juxtaposition

gracious in defeat as he had been in victory. "The enal
ploy was thine." He marched back up the slope, his troops

falling in behind him.

The victory had been won; juxtaposition could end, and
fte frames could safely separate, never to intersect again
in this region of the universe. Stile could see the glimmer
of the curtain contracting, dosing more rapidly from the
south so as to finish at the site of the Oracle beneath them.
Or was that from the north it was dosing? It was hard to
be sure, with that reversal-spell. Beyond that line, north
(7) was the verdant world of Phaze; at the crest to the
south (7) was the barren desert of Proton. Only the direc-
tions were reversed, not the terrain, somehow; the goblins
had marched the wrong way home. Not that it mattered;

they were creatures of Phaze who would remain there
regardless, just as the robots and cyborgs would remain in

Proton.

Stile himself would now return forever to Proton, to

settle his debt to Citizen Merle, marry Sheen, and work
with the Oracle-computer to reform the existing order. His
alternate self would reanimate to be with Neysa and Clip
and Stile's other friends of Phaze and the Lady Blue. How

much better off he would bel

"Thy life seems not dreary to me," the Blue Adept
thought. "The sheer challenge, the strange and fascinating
bypaths of politics, the marvelous Game, and the ladies in
Proton—no woman could be better than Sheen. Thou hast

far the best of it, methinks."

"Just do thou wrap up my commitments in Phaze," Stile
thought back sourly. "Petition must be made to the Herd
Stallion to release Clip to pair with Belle; that is best for
both of them. And it is in my mind that Trool the troll,
with his integrity and skill at sculpture, should be given
the book of magic and become the new Red Adept, fash-
ioning useful magic amulets for—"

"That was my thought, fooll" Blue thought. "Of course

Iwffl—"
Then the closing curtain caught them. "Ah, the re-

versall" Blue thought, amazed, as his other soul was drawn
from Stile's association. "Farewell, selfl"

Stile blinked. Blue had caught on to something Stile had

juxtaposition                     357

not, it seemed, and now it was too late to ascertain what.
That, and the whole wonderful world of Phaze, were gone.
He felt the bitter tears of loss. Never to see the Lady Blue
again, or Neysa—

But he could not afford self-pity. He had things to do in
this world. He opened his eyes.

He was lying on a bed in a chamber of the Blue De-
mesnes. The Proton replica, of course. He must have lost
consciousness, and Sheen had brought him here and left
him to recover in decent privacy. Sheen was certainly the
perfect woman; too bad she had not been able to remain
in Phaze—but that would have been too complicated any-
way.

He got up, felt momentarily dizzy with the sudden ris-
ing, and quickly squatted to let the blood return to his
head. It was as if he had been lying here a long time, his
body unused; he felt somewhat awkward and unsteady,
but now was recovering rapidly.

He stared at his knees with slow amazement. They were
fully flexed, without pain. His injury had been curedl

Oh—of course. Sheen had taken advantage of his un-
consciousness to have him in surgery, and now he was
better. Though he really would not have expected her to
do that without consulting him first.

He walked to the door. The short hall was dark, so he
sang a spell: "Right—light." Immediately there was light,
though only half as bright as he had intended.

Wait—he could not do magic in Proton 1

He glanced back—and saw the harmonica lying on a
table beside the bed. Blue's harmonica, left with the—

Then he heard a light tread on the floor, probably
someone alerted by Stile's own motion. He recognized it
immediately: the Lady Blue. Sheen's step was quite dif-
ferent.

He knew with a shock of incredulous joy that something
had gone wrong. The reversal had sent himself and his
alternate self to the wrong frames! Stile's soul had gone to
the golem body, whose knees were good, while the Blue
Adept had left Phaze—

Phaze would not be safe until the Blue Adept departed
it forever. The prophecy had been fulfilled after all. Stile




358                    juxtaposition

was in Phaze, not the true Blue Adept, who had been here
all along, in the harmonica, until this final separation. The
Brown Adept, unacquainted with the book of magic,
prompted by the all-knowing Oracle, had made the re-
versal-spell too comprehensive, and thus—

And the other prophecy, which he had thought had
come after the fact—that Stile would be betrayed, for his
own good, by a young-seeming woman. Brown seemed as
young as they came. That mixup had been no accidenti
She had perceived more cleariy than he where his true
future lay, and had acted to make it come true. How
neatly it all fit together now! The Blue Adept, loath to live
with a woman who no longer loved him, and fascinated by
the marvelous world of science and the beautiful, loyal,
deserving creature Sheen—who was as much intrigued by
Blue, a person in Stile's own image and spirit who had left

his love for the Lady Blue behind—

Now the Lady Blue came into view, breathtakingly

lovely and somber. Her face composed, she approached
Stile. "My Lord, thou knowest I will serve thee in all
things with grace and propriety," she said sadly. "What is

to be, must be."

She thought he was Blue, of course—and she loved

Stile. She had the mettle to carry through, to bear and
raise his son, with no word of regret or reproach—but this

time she would not need it.

"Beloved," Stile said. "I have news for thee, thee,

thee..."

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Piers Anthony was born in August, 1934, in England, spent
a year in Spain, and came to America at age six. He was
naturalized American in 1958 while serving in the U.S.
Army. He now lives in Florida with his wife Carol and their
daughters Penny and Cheryl. His first story was submitted
to a magazine in 1954, but he did not make his first story
sale until 1962. Similarly, he submitted his first novel, which
was also his thesis for his B.A. degree from college, in 1956,
but did not sell a novel until 1966. In 1985 his 50th book was
published. His first Xanth novel, A Spell for Chameleon,
won the August Derleth Fantasy award for 1977. His novel
Ogre, Ogre may have been the first original fantasy paper-
back ever to make the New York Times bestseller list, and
all his fantasies since then have been bestsellers. He is cur-
rently writing three or four novels and answering twelve
hundred letters a year. His house is hidden deep in the for-
est, almost impossible to find, and he now has a computer in
the horse pasture.


